.. sectionauthor:: `Danielle J. Navarro <https://djnavarro.net/>`_ and `David R. Foxcroft <https://www.davidfoxcroft.com/>`_

Prologue
========

This book was brought to you today by the letter ``R`` and the word ``jamovi``.

Overview
--------

*learning statistics with jamovi* covers the contents of an introductory
statistics class, as typically taught to undergraduate psychology students. It
discusses how to get started in jamovi as well as giving an introduction to data
manipulation. From a statistical perspective, the book discusses descriptive
statistics and graphing first, followed by chapters on probability theory,
sampling and estimation, and null hypothesis testing. After introducing the
theory, the book covers the analysis of contingency tables, correlation,
*t*-tests, regression, ANOVA and factor analysis. Bayesian statistics are covered
at the end of the book.

This book is an adaptation of Danielle Navarro's (2018) book “Learning
statistics with R: A tutorial for psychology students and other beginners.”
(`https://learningstatisticswithr.com <https://learningstatisticswithr.com>`__\\).

The jamovi version of this book was first released in 2018, as version 0.65. 
Versions 0.70 and 0.75 were released in subsequent years with corrections and
additions. A PDF version of the book is available for free download from the
link in the citation below. All the data files you need can be accessed for
free within jamovi via an add-on module in the jamovi library (lsj-data).

Citation
--------

Navarro, D. J., & Foxcroft, D. R. (2025). *learning statistics with jamovi: a
tutorial for psychology students and other beginners.*
`https://doi.org/10.11647/OBP.0333 <https://doi.org/10.11647/OBP.0333>`__

This book is published under a Creative Commons BY-SA license (`CC BY-SA
version 4.0 <https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/4.0/>`__). This means
that this book can be reused, remixed, retained, revised and redistributed
(including commercially) as long as appropriate credit is given to the authors.
If you remix, or modify the original version of this open textbook, you must
redistribute all versions of this open textbook under the same license.
