.. sectionauthor:: `Danielle J. Navarro <https://djnavarro.net/>`_ and `David R. Foxcroft <https://www.davidfoxcroft.com/>`_

Statistics in everyday life
---------------------------

.. epigraph::
   | *“We are drowning in information,*
   | * but we are starved for knowledge”*
   
   -- Various authors, original probably John Naisbitt

When I started writing up my lecture notes I took the 20 most recent
news articles posted to the ABC news website. Of those 20 articles, it
turned out that 8 of them involved a discussion of something that I
would call a statistical topic and 6 of those made a mistake. The most
common error, if you’re curious, was failing to report baseline data
(e.g., the article mentions that 5% of people in situation X have some
characteristic Y, but doesn’t say how common the characteristic is for
everyone else!). The point I’m trying to make here isn’t that
journalists are bad at statistics (though they almost always are), it’s
that a basic knowledge of statistics is very helpful for trying to
figure out when someone else is either making a mistake or even lying to
you. In fact, one of the biggest things that a knowledge of statistics
does to you is cause you to get angry at the newspaper or the internet
on a far more frequent basis. You can find a good example of this in
the section `A real life example
<Ch04_Descriptives_1.html#a-real-life-example>`__. In later versions of
this book I’ll try to include more anecdotes along those lines.

There’s more to research methods than statistics
------------------------------------------------

So far, most of what I’ve talked about is statistics, and so you’d be
forgiven for thinking that statistics is all I care about in life. To be
fair, you wouldn’t be far wrong, but research methodology is a broader
concept than statistics. So most research methods courses will cover a
lot of topics that relate much more to the pragmatics of research
design, and in particular the issues that you encounter when trying to
do research with humans. However, about 99% of student *fears* relate to
the statistics part of the course, so I’ve focused on the stats in this
discussion, and hopefully I’ve convinced you that statistics matters,
and more importantly, that it’s not to be feared. That being said, it’s
pretty typical for introductory research methods classes to be very
stats-heavy. This is not (usually) because the lecturers are evil
people. Quite the contrary, in fact. Introductory classes focus a lot on
the statistics because you almost always find yourself needing
statistics before you need the other research methods training. Why?
Because almost all of your assignments in other classes will rely on
statistical training, to a much greater extent than they rely on other
methodological tools. It’s not common for undergraduate assignments to
require you to design your own study from the ground up (in which case
you would need to know a lot about research design), but it *is* common
for assignments to ask you to analyse and interpret data that were
collected in a study that someone else designed (in which case you need
statistics). In that sense, from the perspective of allowing you to do
well in all your other classes, the statistics is more urgent.

But note that “urgent” is different from “important” – they both matter.
I really do want to stress that research design is just as important as
data analysis, and this book does spend a fair amount of time on it.
However, while statistics has a kind of universality, and provides a set
of core tools that are useful for most types of psychological research,
the research methods side isn’t quite so universal. There are some
general principles that everyone should think about, but a lot of
research design is very idiosyncratic, and is specific to the area of
research that you want to engage in. To the extent that it’s the details
that matter, those details don’t usually show up in an introductory
stats and research methods class.
