.. sectionauthor:: `Danielle J. Navarro <https://djnavarro.net/>`_ and `David R. Foxcroft <https://www.davidfoxcroft.com/>`_

Experimental and non-experimental research
------------------------------------------

One of the big distinctions that you should be aware of is the
distinction between “experimental research” and “non-experimental
research”. When we make this distinction, what we’re really talking
about is the degree of control that the researcher exercises over the
people and events in the study.

Experimental research
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The key feature of **experimental research** is that the researcher
controls all aspects of the study, especially what participants
experience during the study. In particular, the researcher manipulates
or varies the predictor variables (IVs) but allows the outcome variable
(DV) to vary naturally. The idea here is to deliberately vary the
predictors (IVs) to see if they have any causal effects on the outcomes.
Moreover, in order to ensure that there’s no possibility that something
other than the predictor variables is causing the outcomes, everything
else is kept constant or is in some other way “balanced”, to ensure that
they have no effect on the results. In practice, it’s almost impossible
to *think* of everything else that might have an influence on the
outcome of an experiment, much less keep it constant. The standard
solution to this is **randomisation**. That is, we randomly assign
people to different groups, and then give each group a different
treatment (i.e., assign them different values of the predictor
variables). We’ll talk more about randomisation later, but for now it’s
enough to say that what randomisation does is minimise (but not
eliminate) the possibility that there are any systematic difference
between groups.

Let’s consider a very simple, completely unrealistic and grossly
unethical example. Suppose you wanted to find out if smoking causes lung
cancer. One way to do this would be to find people who smoke and people
who don’t smoke and look to see if smokers have a higher rate of lung
cancer. This is *not* a proper experiment, since the researcher doesn’t
have a lot of control over who is and isn’t a smoker. And this really
matters. For instance, it might be that people who choose to smoke
cigarettes also tend to have poor diets, or maybe they tend to work in
asbestos mines, or whatever. The point here is that the groups (smokers
and non-smokers) actually differ on lots of things, not *just* smoking.
So it might be that the higher incidence of lung cancer among smokers is
caused by something else, and not by smoking per se. In technical terms
these other things (e.g. diet) are called “confounders”, and we’ll talk
about those in just a moment.

In the meantime, let’s consider what a proper experiment might look
like. Recall that our concern was that smokers and non-smokers might
differ in lots of ways. The solution, as long as you have no ethics, is
to *control* who smokes and who doesn’t. Specifically, if we randomly
divide young non-smokers into two groups and force half of them to
become smokers, then it’s very unlikely that the groups will differ in
any respect other than the fact that half of them smoke. That way, if
our smoking group gets cancer at a higher rate than the non-smoking
group, we can feel pretty confident that (a) smoking does cause cancer
and (b) we’re murderers.

Non-experimental research
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

**Non-experimental research** is a broad term that covers “any study in
which the researcher doesn’t have as much control as they do in an
experiment”. Obviously, control is something that scientists like to
have, but as the previous example illustrates there are lots of
situations in which you can’t or shouldn’t try to obtain that control.
Since it’s grossly unethical (and almost certainly criminal) to force
people to smoke in order to find out if they get cancer, this is a good
example of a situation in which you really shouldn’t try to obtain
experimental control. But there are other reasons too. Even leaving
aside the ethical issues, our “smoking experiment” does have a few other
issues. For instance, when I suggested that we “force” half of the
people to become smokers, I was talking about *starting* with a sample
of non-smokers, and then forcing them to become smokers. While this
sounds like the kind of solid, evil experimental design that a mad
scientist would love, it might not be a very sound way of investigating
the effect in the real world. For instance, suppose that smoking only
causes lung cancer when people have poor diets, and suppose also that
people who normally smoke do tend to have poor diets. However, since the
“smokers” in our experiment aren’t “natural” smokers (i.e., we forced
non-smokers to become smokers, but they didn’t take on all of the other
normal, real life characteristics that smokers might tend to possess)
they probably have better diets. As such, in this silly example they
wouldn’t get lung cancer and our experiment will fail, because it
violates the structure of the “natural” world (the technical name for
this is an “artefactual” result).

One distinction worth making between two types of non-experimental
research is the difference between **quasi-experimental research** and
**case studies**. The example I discussed earlier, in which we wanted to
examine incidence of lung cancer among smokers and non-smokers without
trying to control who smokes and who doesn’t, is a quasi-experimental
design. That is, it’s the same as an experiment but we don’t control the
predictors (IVs). We can still use statistics to analyse the results,
but we have to be a lot more careful and circumspect.

The alternative approach, case studies, aims to provide a very detailed
description of one or a few instances. In general, you can’t use
statistics to analyse the results of case studies and it’s usually very
hard to draw any general conclusions about “people in general” from a
few isolated examples. However, case studies are very useful in some
situations. Firstly, there are situations where you don’t have any
alternative. Neuropsychology has this issue a lot. Sometimes, you just
can’t find a lot of people with brain damage in a specific brain area,
so the only thing you can do is describe those cases that you do have in
as much detail and with as much care as you can. However, there’s also
some genuine advantages to case studies. Because you don’t have as many
people to study you have the ability to invest lots of time and effort
trying to understand the specific factors at play in each case. This is
a very valuable thing to do. As a consequence, case studies can
complement the more statistically-oriented approaches that you see in
experimental and quasi-experimental designs. We won’t talk much about
case studies in this book, but they are nevertheless very valuable
tools!
