.. sectionauthor:: `Danielle J. Navarro <https://djnavarro.net/>`_ and `David R. Foxcroft <https://www.davidfoxcroft.com/>`_

Factorial ANOVA
===============

Over the course of the last few chapters we have done quite a lot. We have
looked at statistical tests you can use when you have one nominal predictor
variable with two groups (e.g. the *t*-test, Chapter `Comparing two means
<Ch11_tTest.html#comparing-two-means>`__) or with three or more groups (e.g.
in the Chapter `Comparing several means: One-way ANOVA 
<Ch13_ANOVA.html#comparing-several-means-one-way-anova>`__).
The chapter on regression (Chapter `Correlation and linear regression
<Ch12_Regression.html#correlation-and-linear-regression>`__) introduced a
powerful new idea, that is building statistical models with *multiple*
continuous predictor variables used to explain a single outcome variable. For
instance, a regression model could be used to predict the number of errors a
student makes in a reading comprehension test based on the number of hours they
studied for the test and their score on a standardised IQ test.

The goal in this chapter is to extend the idea of using multiple predictors
into the ANOVA framework. For instance, suppose we were interested in using the
reading comprehension test to measure student achievements in three different
schools, and we suspect that girls and boys are developing at different rates
(and so would be expected to have different performance on average). Each
student is classified in two different ways: on the basis of their gender and
on the basis of their school. What we’d like to do is analyse the reading
comprehension scores in terms of *both* of these grouping variables. The tool
for doing so is generically referred to as **factorial ANOVA**. However, since
we have two grouping variables, we sometimes refer to the analysis as a two-way
ANOVA, in contrast to the one-way ANOVAs that we ran in Chapter `Comparing
several means (one-way ANOVA)
<Ch13_ANOVA.html#comparing-several-means-one-way-anova>`__.

.. toctree::
   :hidden:
   
   Ch14_ANOVA2_01
   Ch14_ANOVA2_02
   Ch14_ANOVA2_03
   Ch14_ANOVA2_04
   Ch14_ANOVA2_05
   Ch14_ANOVA2_06
   Ch14_ANOVA2_07
   Ch14_ANOVA2_08
   Ch14_ANOVA2_09
   Ch14_ANOVA2_10
   Ch14_ANOVA2_11
