.. sectionauthor:: `Danielle J. Navarro <https://djnavarro.net/>`_ and `David R. Foxcroft <https://www.davidfoxcroft.com/>`_

========
Epilogue
========

.. epigraph::
   | *“Begin at the beginning”*, the King said, very gravely,
   | ““and go on till you come to the end: then stop”*
   
   -- Lewis Carroll
   
It feels somewhat strange to be writing this chapter, and more than a
little inappropriate. An epilogue is what you write when a book is
finished, and this book really isn’t finished. There are a lot of things
still missing from this book. It doesn’t have an index yet. A lot of
references are missing. There are no “do it yourself” exercises. And in
general, I feel that there a lot of things that are wrong with the
presentation, organisation and content of this book. Given all that, I
don’t want to try to write a “proper” epilogue. I haven’t finished
writing the substantive content yet, so it doesn’t make sense to try to
bring it all together. But this version of the book is going to go
online for students to use, and you will may be to purchase a hard copy
too, so I want to give it at least a veneer of closure. So let’s give it
a go, shall we?

First, I’m going to talk a bit about some of the content that I wish I’d
had the chance to cram into this version of the book, just so that you
can get a sense of what other ideas are out there in the world of
statistics. I think this would be important even if this book were
getting close to a final product. One thing that students often fail to
realise is that their introductory statistics classes are just that, an
introduction. If you want to go out into the wider world and do real
data analysis, you have to learn a whole lot of new tools that extend
the content of your undergraduate lectures in all sorts of different
ways. Don’t assume that something can’t be done just because it wasn’t
covered in undergrad. Don’t assume that something is the right thing to
do just because it *was* covered in an undergrad class. To stop you from
falling victim to that trap, I think it’s useful to give a bit of an
overview of some of the other ideas out there.

.. toctree::
   :hidden:
   
   Ch17_Epilogue_1
   Ch17_Epilogue_2
   Ch17_Epilogue_3
   Ch17_Epilogue_4
   Ch17_Epilogue_5
