index.rst, before:

.. Learning statistics with jamovi master file

===============================
Learning statistics with jamovi
===============================

Welcome to Learning statistics with `jamovi <https://www.jamovi.org>`__, which is a tutorial that aims to help psychology students and other beginners with the first steps into jamovi.
jamovi is a free and open statistical software to bridge the gap between researcher and statistician.


.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1
   
   Other/Prologue


.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1
   :caption: Background
   :name: sec-lsj-background

   Ch01/Ch01_WhyStats
   Ch02/Ch02_StudyDesign


.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1
   :caption: An introduction to jamovi
   :name: sec-lsj-introduction

   Ch03/Ch03_jamoviIntro
   Ch04/Ch04_Descriptives
   Ch05/Ch05_Graphics
   Ch06/Ch06_DataHandling


.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1
   :caption: Statistical theory
   :name: sec-lsj-theory

   Other/StatTheory
   Ch07/Ch07_Probability
   Ch08/Ch08_Estimation
   Ch09/Ch09_HypothesisTesting


.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1
   :caption: Statistical tools
   :name: sec-lsj-tools

   Ch10/Ch10_ChiSquare
   Ch11/Ch11_tTest
   Ch12/Ch12_Regression   
   Ch13/Ch13_ANOVA
   Ch14/Ch14_ANOVA2
   Ch15/Ch15_FactorAnalysis


.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1
   :caption: Endings, alternatives, prospects
   :name: sec-lsj-endings

   Ch16/Ch16_Bayes
   Ch17/Ch17_Epilogue


.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1

   Other/References

Commit message:

Added instructions how to change the language on readthedocs

index.rst, after:

.. Learning statistics with jamovi master file

===============================
Learning statistics with jamovi
===============================

Welcome to Learning statistics with `jamovi <https://www.jamovi.org>`__, which
is a tutorial that aims to help psychology students and other beginners with
the first steps into jamovi. jamovi is a free and open statistical software to
bridge the gap between researcher and statistician.

Before we begin, a few remarks on how to use this web page. The content is
available in different languages. To change the language, please head to the
“Learning statistics with jamovi” roll-up menu (in the bottom-left corner) and
click on it. A larger menu unfolds where you can select the language you would
like to read the documentation in.

So far, only a few languages (e.g., German) are translated completely, but you
are very welcome to contribute to a `translation into your language
<https://hosted.weblate.org/projects/lsjdocs/>`__.

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1
   
   Other/Prologue


.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1
   :caption: Background
   :name: sec-lsj-background

   Ch01/Ch01_WhyStats
   Ch02/Ch02_StudyDesign


.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1
   :caption: An introduction to jamovi
   :name: sec-lsj-introduction

   Ch03/Ch03_jamoviIntro
   Ch04/Ch04_Descriptives
   Ch05/Ch05_Graphics
   Ch06/Ch06_DataHandling


.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1
   :caption: Statistical theory
   :name: sec-lsj-theory

   Other/StatTheory
   Ch07/Ch07_Probability
   Ch08/Ch08_Estimation
   Ch09/Ch09_HypothesisTesting


.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1
   :caption: Statistical tools
   :name: sec-lsj-tools

   Ch10/Ch10_ChiSquare
   Ch11/Ch11_tTest
   Ch12/Ch12_Regression   
   Ch13/Ch13_ANOVA
   Ch14/Ch14_ANOVA2
   Ch15/Ch15_FactorAnalysis


.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1
   :caption: Endings, alternatives, prospects
   :name: sec-lsj-endings

   Ch16/Ch16_Bayes
   Ch17/Ch17_Epilogue


.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1

   Other/References
