Ch03/Ch03_jamoviIntro_3.rst, before:

.. sectionauthor:: `Danielle J. Navarro <https://djnavarro.net/>`_ and `David R. Foxcroft <https://www.davidfoxcroft.com/>`_

The spreadsheet
---------------

It is possible to simply begin typing values into the jamovi spreadsheet as
you would in any other spreadsheet software. Alternatively, existing data
sets can be opened in jamovi (see the section “Loading data in jamovi”
further down on the page).

In jamovi data is represented in a spreadsheet with each column representing
a “variable” and each row representing a “case” or “participant”.


Data Variables
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The most commonly used variables in jamovi are ``Data`` variables, these
variables simply contain data either loaded from a data file, or “typed in”
by the user. ``Data`` variables can be one of four measurement levels.
These levels are designated by the symbol in the header of the
variable’s column:

- The ``ID`` variable type |ID| is unique to jamovi. It is intended for variables
  that contain identifiers that you would almost never want to analyse.
  For example, a persons name, or a participant ID. Specifying an ID
  variable type can improve performance when interacting with very large
  data sets.

- ``Nominal`` variables |nominal| are for categorical variables which are text
  labels, for example a column called ``gender`` with the values ``male`` and
  ``female`` would be nominal. So would a person’s name. Nominal variable
  values can also have a numeric value. These variables are used most often
  when importing data which codes values with numbers rather than text. For
  example, a column in a dataset may contain the values 1 for ``male``, and 2
  for ``female``. It is possible to add nice “human-readable” labels to these
  values with the variable editor (more on this later).

- ``Ordinal`` variables |ordinal| are like ``Nominal`` variables, except the
  values have a specific order. An example is a Likert scale with 3 being
  “strongly agree” and -3 being “strongly disagree”.

- ``Continuous`` variables |continuous| are variables which exist on a continuous
  scale. Examples might be height or weight. This is also referred to as
  “interval scale” or “ratio scale”.

In addition, you can also specify different data types: variables have a
data type of either ``Text``, ``Integer`` or ``Decimal``.

.. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

.. figure:: ../_images/lsj_measurementlevels.*
   :alt: Measurement levels and data types in jamovi
   :name: fig-measurementlevels

   Window to set measurement levels and data types in jamovi.
   
.. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

When starting with a blank spreadsheet and typing values in the variable type
will change automatically depending on the data you enter. This isa good way
to get a feel for which variable types go with which sorts of data. Similarly,
when opening a data file jamovi will try and guess the variable type from the
data in each column. In both cases this automatic approach may not be correct,
and it may be necessary to manually specify the variable type with the variable
editor.

.. _variable_editor:

The variable editor can be opened by selecting ``Setup`` from the ``Data``
ribbon or by double-clicking on the variable column header. The variable
editor allows you to change the name of the variable and, for data variables,
the measure type, the order of the value levels, and the label displayed for
each level. The variable editor can be dismissed by clicking ``↑``.

New variables can be inserted or appended to the data set using the ``Add``
button from the ``Data`` tab. The ``Add`` button also allows the addition
of computed variables.

Changing data from one level to another
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Sometimes you want to change the variable level. This can happen for all sorts
of reasons. Sometimes when you import data from files, it can come to you in
the wrong format. Numbers sometimes get imported as nominal |nominal|, text
values. Dates may get imported as text. Participant-ID values |ID| can
sometimes be read as continuous |continuous|: nominal values |nominal| can
sometimes be read as ordinal |ordinal| or even continuous |continuous|. There is
a good chance that sometimes you will want to convert a variable from one
measurement level into another one. Or, to use the correct term, you want to
**coerce** the variable from one class into another.

If you want to change a variable’s measurement level then you can do this in
the jamovi ``Data`` view. Click on the variable name in the top row of the data
table and then select the desired measurement level under ``Measure Type`` –
``continuous`` |continuous|, ``ordinal`` |ordinal| or ``nominal`` |nominal|.


Computed variables
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Computed Variables are those which take their value by performing a
computation on other variables. Computed Variables can be used for a range of
purposes, including log transforms, *z*-scores, sum-scores, negative scoring
and means. There is another variable type, Transformed variables, that can be
used to “recode” variables (e.g., when inverting items). This variable type is
briefly described at the end of the subsection :ref:`EFA_in_jamovi` and in
:numref:`fig-efa7`.

Computed variables can be added to the data set with the ``Add`` button
available on the ``Data`` tab. This will produce a formula box where you can
specify the formula. The usual arithmetic operators are available. Some
examples of formulas are:

.. code-block:: text

   A + B
   LOG10(len)
   MEAN(A, B)
   (dose - VMEAN(dose)) / VSTDEV(dose)

In order, these are the sum of ``A`` and ``B``, a log (base 10) transform
of ``len``, the mean of ``A`` and ``B``, and the *z*-score of the variable
``dose``. :numref:`fig-computedvariable` shows the jamovi screen for the
new variable computed as the *z*-score of ``dose`` (from the ``Tooth Growth``
example data set).

.. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

.. figure:: ../_images/lsj_computedvariable.*
   :alt: Computed variable: *z*-score of ``dose``
   :name: fig-computedvariable

   A newly computed variable, the *z*-score of ``dose``.
   
.. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

*V-functions*

Several functions are already available in jamovi and available from the
drop down box labelled *f*\ :sub:`x`. A number of functions appear in pairs,
one prefixed with a V and the other not. V functions perform their
calculation on a variable as a whole, where as non-V functions perform
their calculation row by row. For example, ``MEAN(A, B)`` will produce the
mean of ``A`` and ``B`` for each row. Where as ``VMEAN(A)`` gives the mean of
all the values in ``A``.


------

.. |ID|                                image:: ../_images/variable-id.*
   :width: 16px

.. |continuous|                        image:: ../_images/variable-continuous.*
   :width: 16px

.. |nominal|                           image:: ../_images/variable-nominal.*
   :width: 16px

.. |ordinal|                           image:: ../_images/variable-ordinal.*
   :width: 16px

Commit message:

Unify the spelling of data set (dataset -> data set)

Ch03/Ch03_jamoviIntro_3.rst, after:

.. sectionauthor:: `Danielle J. Navarro <https://djnavarro.net/>`_ and `David R. Foxcroft <https://www.davidfoxcroft.com/>`_

The spreadsheet
---------------

It is possible to simply begin typing values into the jamovi spreadsheet as
you would in any other spreadsheet software. Alternatively, existing data
sets can be opened in jamovi (see the section “Loading data in jamovi”
further down on the page).

In jamovi data is represented in a spreadsheet with each column representing
a “variable” and each row representing a “case” or “participant”.


Data Variables
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The most commonly used variables in jamovi are ``Data`` variables, these
variables simply contain data either loaded from a data file, or “typed in”
by the user. ``Data`` variables can be one of four measurement levels.
These levels are designated by the symbol in the header of the
variable’s column:

- The ``ID`` variable type |ID| is unique to jamovi. It is intended for variables
  that contain identifiers that you would almost never want to analyse.
  For example, a persons name, or a participant ID. Specifying an ID
  variable type can improve performance when interacting with very large
  data sets.

- ``Nominal`` variables |nominal| are for categorical variables which are text
  labels, for example a column called ``gender`` with the values ``male`` and
  ``female`` would be nominal. So would a person’s name. Nominal variable
  values can also have a numeric value. These variables are used most often
  when importing data which codes values with numbers rather than text. For
  example, a column in a data set may contain the values 1 for ``male``, and 2
  for ``female``. It is possible to add nice “human-readable” labels to these
  values with the variable editor (more on this later).

- ``Ordinal`` variables |ordinal| are like ``Nominal`` variables, except the
  values have a specific order. An example is a Likert scale with 3 being
  “strongly agree” and -3 being “strongly disagree”.

- ``Continuous`` variables |continuous| are variables which exist on a continuous
  scale. Examples might be height or weight. This is also referred to as
  “interval scale” or “ratio scale”.

In addition, you can also specify different data types: variables have a
data type of either ``Text``, ``Integer`` or ``Decimal``.

.. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

.. figure:: ../_images/lsj_measurementlevels.*
   :alt: Measurement levels and data types in jamovi
   :name: fig-measurementlevels

   Window to set measurement levels and data types in jamovi.
   
.. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

When starting with a blank spreadsheet and typing values in the variable type
will change automatically depending on the data you enter. This isa good way
to get a feel for which variable types go with which sorts of data. Similarly,
when opening a data file jamovi will try and guess the variable type from the
data in each column. In both cases this automatic approach may not be correct,
and it may be necessary to manually specify the variable type with the variable
editor.

.. _variable_editor:

The variable editor can be opened by selecting ``Setup`` from the ``Data``
ribbon or by double-clicking on the variable column header. The variable
editor allows you to change the name of the variable and, for data variables,
the measure type, the order of the value levels, and the label displayed for
each level. The variable editor can be dismissed by clicking ``↑``.

New variables can be inserted or appended to the data set using the ``Add``
button from the ``Data`` tab. The ``Add`` button also allows the addition
of computed variables.

Changing data from one level to another
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Sometimes you want to change the variable level. This can happen for all sorts
of reasons. Sometimes when you import data from files, it can come to you in
the wrong format. Numbers sometimes get imported as nominal |nominal|, text
values. Dates may get imported as text. Participant-ID values |ID| can
sometimes be read as continuous |continuous|: nominal values |nominal| can
sometimes be read as ordinal |ordinal| or even continuous |continuous|. There is
a good chance that sometimes you will want to convert a variable from one
measurement level into another one. Or, to use the correct term, you want to
**coerce** the variable from one class into another.

If you want to change a variable’s measurement level then you can do this in
the jamovi ``Data`` view. Click on the variable name in the top row of the data
table and then select the desired measurement level under ``Measure Type`` –
``continuous`` |continuous|, ``ordinal`` |ordinal| or ``nominal`` |nominal|.

.. _computed_variables:

Computed Variables
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Computed variables are those which take their value by performing a
computation on other variables. Computed variables can be used for a range of
purposes, including log transforms, *z*-scores, sum-scores, negative scoring
and means.

Computed variables can be added to the data set with the ``Add`` button
available on the ``Data`` tab. This will produce a formula box where you can
specify the formula. The usual arithmetic operators are available. Some
examples of formulas are:

.. code-block:: text

   A + B
   LOG10(len)
   MEAN(A, B)
   (dose - VMEAN(dose)) / VSTDEV(dose)

In order, these are the sum of ``A`` and ``B``, a log (base 10) transform
of ``len``, the mean of ``A`` and ``B``, and the *z*-score of the variable
``dose``. :numref:`fig-computedvariable` shows the jamovi screen for the
new variable computed as the *z*-score of ``dose`` (from the ``Tooth Growth``
example data set).

.. _transformed_variables:

Transformed Variables
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The transformation that is used when creating this type of variable, relies on
a “receipe” that is :ref:`created once and can then be applied to multiple
variables <_create_transformation>`. This section describes in more detail how
to generate such a “receipe”. Transformed variables are often used to “recode”
variables (e.g., when inverting items), a typical transformation which
described in more detail at the end of the subsection :ref:`EFA_in_jamovi` and
in :numref:`fig-efa7`. When transforming or recoding variables in jamovi, a new
“transformed variable” is created from an original “source variable”. This
permits you to have access to both the original, untransformed data, and the
transformed data.

After :ref:`having created a transformation <_create_transformation>`, you can
apply this transformation using the transform editor. It lets you define the
name and the description of the transformed variable to be created, which source
variable should be used and which transformation should be applied (all
transformations that already were defined are available from a drop-down menu in
the editor).


.. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

.. figure:: ../_images/lsj_computedvariable.*
   :alt: Computed variable: *z*-score of ``dose``
   :name: fig-computedvariable

   A newly computed variable, the *z*-score of ``dose``.
   
.. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

*V-functions*

Several functions are already available in jamovi and available from the
drop down box labelled *f*\ :sub:`x`. A number of functions appear in pairs,
one prefixed with a V and the other not. V functions perform their
calculation on a variable as a whole, where as non-V functions perform
their calculation row by row. For example, ``MEAN(A, B)`` will produce the
mean of ``A`` and ``B`` for each row. Where as ``VMEAN(A)`` gives the mean of
all the values in ``A``.


------

.. |ID|                                image:: ../_images/variable-id.*
   :width: 16px

.. |continuous|                        image:: ../_images/variable-continuous.*
   :width: 16px

.. |nominal|                           image:: ../_images/variable-nominal.*
   :width: 16px

.. |ordinal|                           image:: ../_images/variable-ordinal.*
   :width: 16px
