Ch03/Ch03_jamoviIntro_2.rst, before:

.. sectionauthor:: `Danielle J. Navarro <https://djnavarro.net/>`_ and `David R. Foxcroft <https://www.davidfoxcroft.com/>`_

Analyses
--------

Analyses can be selected from the ``Analyses`` ribbon (activate it by clicking
the ``Analyses``-tab at the top of the jamovi window). Here, individual
analyses can be chosen from their respective category (e.g., ``T-Tests``,
``ANOVA`` or ``Regression``). Selecting an analysis will present an **options
panel** for that particular analysis, allowing you to assign different
variables to different parts of the analysis, and select different options.

At the same time, the results for the analysis will appear in the right
**results panel** and will update in real-time as you make changes to the
options. When you have the analysis set up correctly you can dismiss the
analysis options by clicking the arrow to the top right of the options panel.
If you wish to return to these options, you can click on the results that
were produced. In this way, you can return to any analysis that you (or
say, a colleague) created earlier.

If you decide you no longer need a particular analysis, you can remove
it with the results context menu. Right-clicking on the analysis results
will bring up a menu and by selecting ``Analysis`` and then ``Remove`` the
analysis can be removed.

Copy and Paste
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

jamovi produces nice tables and attractive plots that are formatted in
accordance with the American Psychological Association (APA) Publication
Manual. A very useful feature of jamovi is the opportunity to be able to
directly copy and paste these, perhaps into a document, or into an email
to a colleague. To copy results right click on the object of interest and
from the menu select exactly what you want to copy. The menu allows you
to choose to copy only the image or the entire analysis. Selecting
``Copy`` copies the content to the clipboard and this can be pasted into
other programs in the usual way. You can practice this later on when we
do some analyses.

Installing add-on modules into jamovi
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A really great feature of jamovi is the ability to install add-on modules from
the jamovi library. These add-on modules have been developed by the jamovi
community, i.e., jamovi users and developers who have created special software
add-ons that do other, usually more advanced, analyses that go beyond the
capabilities of that come included with jamovi (although these analyses
already cover the perhaps 95\% of analyses you would run within psychology).

To install add-on modules, just click on the large ``+`` in the top right
of the jamovi window, select ``jamovi library`` and then browse through
the various add-on modules that are available. Choose the one(s) you
want, and then install them (as shown in :numref:`fig-modules`).

It is that easy. The newly installed modules can then be accessed from the
``Analyses`` ribbon or by clicking on the the large ``+`` and the selecting
the analyses you need from the menu that opens.\ [#]_ Try it… useful add-on
modules to install include ``scatr`` (added under ``Descriptives``) and |Rj|_.

.. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

.. figure:: ../_images/lsj_modules.*
   :alt: jamovi modules in the jamovi library
   :name: fig-modules

   Installing add-on modules in jamovi
   
.. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

Syntax mode
~~~~~~~~~~~

jamovi also provides an syntax mode. In this mode jamovi produces
equivalent R code for each analysis. To change to syntax mode, select
the settings menu (``⋮``; top right corner in jamovi) and click the
``Syntax mode`` checkbox there. You can turn off syntax mode by clicking
this a second time.

In syntax mode analyses continue to operate as before but now they
produce R syntax. Like all results objects in jamovi, you can right click
on these items (including the R syntax) and copy and paste them, for example
into an R session. To import jamovi-files within an R session, you can use
the function ``read_omv`` from the R-package ``jmvReadWrite`` (which can be
installed using ``install.packages("jmvReadWrite")`` in an R-session. The
package also contains further functions for handling jamovi-files in R (e.g.,
``write_omv`` for writing jamovi-files, ``convert_omv`` for converting other
file formats to a jamovi-file, or ``merge_cols_omv`` for adding columns from
a second dataset while matching the two datasets by an index variable). Help
how to use these functions can be obtained by preceding the function name by
a ``?`` (e.g., ``?jmvReadWrite::read_omv``).

But more on analyses later. First, let us take a more detailed look at the
spreadsheet view.


--------

.. [#]
   Especially if you install many modules, your ``Analyses`` ribbon may get
   cluttered. You can avoid that by “hiding” modules that you don't use that
   often. In order to do this, go to the large ``+``, and then on ``Manage
   installed`` where you then can ``Hide`` modules from the ``Analyses``
   ribbon. You can still access them via the large ``+``. Once you open it,
   a menu appears, listing all your modules and giving you access to the
   analyes within the module if you hover over (then the analyses are shown)
   or click on it (then you can access the analyes).

.. |Rj|                                replace:: ``Rj``
.. _Rj:                                https://docs.jamovi.org/_pages/Rj_overview.html

Commit message:

Unify the spelling of data set (dataset -> data set)

Ch03/Ch03_jamoviIntro_2.rst, after:

.. sectionauthor:: `Danielle J. Navarro <https://djnavarro.net/>`_ and `David R. Foxcroft <https://www.davidfoxcroft.com/>`_

Analyses
--------

Analyses can be selected from the ``Analyses`` ribbon (activate it by clicking
the ``Analyses``-tab at the top of the jamovi window). Here, individual
analyses can be chosen from their respective category (e.g., ``T-Tests``,
``ANOVA`` or ``Regression``). Selecting an analysis will present an **options
panel** for that particular analysis, allowing you to assign different
variables to different parts of the analysis, and select different options.

At the same time, the results for the analysis will appear in the right
**results panel** and will update in real-time as you make changes to the
options. When you have the analysis set up correctly you can dismiss the
analysis options by clicking the arrow to the top right of the options panel.
If you wish to return to these options, you can click on the results that
were produced. In this way, you can return to any analysis that you (or
say, a colleague) created earlier.

If you decide you no longer need a particular analysis, you can remove
it with the results context menu. Right-clicking on the analysis results
will bring up a menu and by selecting ``Analysis`` and then ``Remove`` the
analysis can be removed.

Copy and Paste
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

jamovi produces nice tables and attractive plots that are formatted in
accordance with the American Psychological Association (APA) Publication
Manual. A very useful feature of jamovi is the opportunity to be able to
directly copy and paste these, perhaps into a document, or into an email
to a colleague. To copy results right click on the object of interest and
from the menu select exactly what you want to copy. The menu allows you
to choose to copy only the image or the entire analysis. Selecting
``Copy`` copies the content to the clipboard and this can be pasted into
other programs in the usual way. You can practice this later on when we
do some analyses.

.. _modules:

Installing add-on modules into jamovi
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

A really great feature of jamovi is the ability to install add-on modules from
the jamovi library. These add-on modules have been developed by the jamovi
community, i.e., jamovi users and developers who have created special software
add-ons that do other, usually more advanced, analyses that go beyond the
capabilities of that come included with jamovi (although these analyses
already cover the perhaps 95\% of analyses you would run within psychology).

To install add-on modules, just click on the large ``+`` in the top right
of the jamovi window, select ``jamovi library`` and then browse through
the various add-on modules that are available. Choose the one(s) you
want, and then install them (as shown in :numref:`fig-modules`).

It is that easy. The newly installed modules can then be accessed from the
``Analyses`` ribbon or by clicking on the the large ``+`` and the selecting
the analyses you need from the menu that opens.\ [#]_ Try it… useful add-on
modules to install include ``scatr`` (added under ``Descriptives``) and |Rj|_.

.. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

.. figure:: ../_images/lsj_modules.*
   :alt: jamovi modules in the jamovi library
   :name: fig-modules

   Installing add-on modules in jamovi
   
.. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

.. _syntax_mode:

Syntax mode
~~~~~~~~~~~

jamovi also provides an syntax mode. In this mode jamovi produces
equivalent R code for each analysis. To change to syntax mode, select
the settings menu (``⋮``; top right corner in jamovi) and click the
``Syntax mode`` checkbox there. You can turn off syntax mode by clicking
this a second time.

In syntax mode analyses continue to operate as before but now they
produce R syntax. Like all results objects in jamovi, you can right click
on these items (including the R syntax) and copy and paste them, for example
into an R session. To import jamovi-files within an R session, you can use
the function ``read_omv`` from the R-package ``jmvReadWrite`` (which can be
installed using ``install.packages("jmvReadWrite")`` in an R-session. The
package also contains further functions for handling jamovi-files in R (e.g.,
``write_omv`` for writing jamovi-files, ``convert_omv`` for converting other
file formats to a jamovi-file, or ``merge_cols_omv`` for adding columns from
a second data set while matching the two data sets by an index variable). Help
how to use these functions can be obtained by preceding the function name by
a ``?`` (e.g., ``?jmvReadWrite::read_omv``).

But more on analyses later. First, let us take a more detailed look at the
spreadsheet view.


--------

.. [#]
   Especially if you install many modules, your ``Analyses`` ribbon may get
   cluttered. You can avoid that by “hiding” modules that you don't use that
   often. In order to do this, go to the large ``+``, and then on ``Manage
   installed`` where you then can ``Hide`` modules from the ``Analyses``
   ribbon. You can still access them via the large ``+``. Once you open it,
   a menu appears, listing all your modules and giving you access to the
   analyes within the module if you hover over (then the analyses are shown)
   or click on it (then you can access the analyes).

.. |Rj|                                replace:: ``Rj``
.. _Rj:                                https://docs.jamovi.org/_pages/Rj_overview.html
