Ch13/Ch13_ANOVA_08.rst, before:

.. sectionauthor:: `Danielle J. Navarro <https://djnavarro.net/>`_ and `David R. Foxcroft <https://www.davidfoxcroft.com/>`_

The Friedman non-parametric repeated measures ANOVA test
--------------------------------------------------------

The Friedman test is a non-parametric version of a repeated measures ANOVA and
can be used instead of the Kruskall-Wallis test when testing for differences
between three or more groups where the same participants are in each group, or
each participant is closely matched with participants in other conditions. If
the dependent variable is ordinal, or if the assumption of normality is not
met, then the Friedman test can be used.

.. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

.. _fig-RManova6:
.. figure:: ../_images/lsj_RManova6.*
   :alt: ‘Repeated Measures ANOVA (Non-parametric)’ dialogue box in jamovi

   ‘Repeated Measures ANOVA (Non-parametric)’ dialogue box in jamovi
   
.. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

As with the Kruskall-Wallis test, the underlying mathematics is complicated,
and won’t be presented here. For the purpose of this book, it is sufficient to
note that jamovi calculates the tie-corrected version of the Friedman test, and
in :numref:`fig-RManova6` there is an example using the Broca’s Aphasia data we
have already looked at.

It’s pretty straightforward to run a Friedman test in jamovi. Just select
``Analyses`` → ``ANOVA`` → ``Repeated Measures ANOVA (Non-parametric)``,
as in :numref:`fig-RManova6`. Then highlight and transfer the names of the
repeated measures variables you wish to compare (``Speech``, ``Conceptual``,
``Syntax``) into the ``Measures:`` text box. To produce descriptive statistics
(means and medians) for the three repeated measures variables, click on the
``Descriptives`` button.

The jamovi results show descriptive statistics, χ²-value, degrees of freedom,
and the *p*-value (:numref:`fig-RManova6`). Since the *p*-value is less than
the level conventionally used to determine significance (*p* < 0.05), we can
conclude that Broca’s Aphasics perform reasonably well on speech production
(median = 7.5) and language comprehension (median = 6.5) tasks. However, their
performance was considerably worse on the syntax task (median = 4.5), with a
significant difference in post-hoc tests between Speech and Syntax task
performance.

Commit message:

Fixing figures for the version 0.75 of the lsj-book and adding symbols / icons (continuous, nominal, ordinal, ID) for measurement level

Ch13/Ch13_ANOVA_08.rst, after:

.. sectionauthor:: `Danielle J. Navarro <https://djnavarro.net/>`_ and `David R. Foxcroft <https://www.davidfoxcroft.com/>`_

The Friedman non-parametric repeated measures ANOVA test
--------------------------------------------------------

The Friedman test is a non-parametric version of a repeated measures ANOVA and
can be used instead of the Kruskall-Wallis test when testing for differences
between three or more groups |nominal| where the same participants are in each
group, or each participant is closely matched with participants in other
conditions. If the dependent variable is ordinal |ordinal|, or if the
assumption of normality is not met, then the Friedman test can be used.

.. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

.. _fig-RManova6:
.. figure:: ../_images/lsj_RManova6.*
   :alt: ‘Repeated Measures ANOVA (Non-parametric)’ dialogue box in jamovi

   ‘Repeated Measures ANOVA (Non-parametric)’ dialogue box in jamovi
   
.. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

As with the Kruskall-Wallis test, the underlying mathematics is complicated,
and won’t be presented here. For the purpose of this book, it is sufficient to
note that jamovi calculates the tie-corrected version of the Friedman test, and
in :numref:`fig-RManova6` there is an example using the Broca’s Aphasia data we
have already looked at.

It’s pretty straightforward to run a Friedman test in jamovi. Just select
``Analyses`` → ``ANOVA`` → ``Repeated Measures ANOVA (Non-parametric)``,
as in :numref:`fig-RManova6`. Then highlight and transfer the names of the
repeated measures variables you wish to compare (``Speech``, ``Conceptual``,
``Syntax``) into the ``Measures:`` text box. To produce descriptive statistics
(means and medians) for the three repeated measures variables, click on the
``Descriptives`` button.

The jamovi results show descriptive statistics, χ²-value, degrees of freedom,
and the *p*-value (:numref:`fig-RManova6`). Since the *p*-value is less than
the level conventionally used to determine significance (*p* < 0.05), we can
conclude that Broca’s Aphasics perform reasonably well on speech production
(median = 7.5) and language comprehension (median = 6.5) tasks. However, their
performance was considerably worse on the syntax task (median = 4.5), with a
significant difference in post-hoc tests between Speech and Syntax task
performance.

.. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

.. |nominal|                          image:: ../_images/variable-nominal.*
   :width: 16px
 
.. |ordinal|                          image:: ../_images/variable-ordinal.*
   :width: 16px
