Ch17/Ch17_Epilogue_2.rst, before:

.. sectionauthor:: `Danielle J. Navarro <https://djnavarro.net/>`_ and `David R. Foxcroft <https://www.davidfoxcroft.com/>`_

Statistical models missing from the book
----------------------------------------

Statistics is a huge field. The core tools that I’ve described in this book
(χ²-tests, t-tests, regression and ANOVA) are basic tools that are widely used
in everyday data analysis, and they form the core of most introductory stats
books. However, there are a lot of other tools out there. There are so very
many data analysis situations that these tools don’t cover, and it would be
great to give you a sense of just how much more there is, for example:

-  **Nonlinear regression.** When discussing regression in chapter
   :doc:`Correlation and linear regression <../Ch12/Ch12_Regression>`, we saw that
   regression assumes that the relationship between predictors and outcomes is
   linear. On the other hand, when we talked about the simpler problem
   of correlation, we saw that there exist tools (e.g., Spearman
   correlations) that are able to assess non-linear relationships between
   variables. There are a number of tools in statistics that can be used
   to do non-linear regression. For instance, some non-linear regression
   models assume that the relationship between predictors and outcomes is
   monotonic (e.g., isotonic regression), while others assume that it is
   smooth but not necessarily monotonic (e.g., Lowess regression), while
   others assume that the relationship is of a known form that happens to
   be nonlinear (e.g., polynomial regression).

-  **Logistic regression.** Yet another variation on regression occurs
   when the outcome variable is binary, but the predictors are
   continuous. For instance, suppose you’re investigating social media,
   and you want to know if it’s possible to predict whether or not
   someone is on Twitter as a function of their income, their age, and a
   range of other variables. This is basically a regression model, but
   you can’t use regular linear regression because the outcome variable
   is binary (you’re either on Twitter or you’re not). Because the
   outcome variable is binary, there’s no way that the residuals could
   possibly be normally distributed. There are a number of tools that
   statisticians can apply to this situation, the most prominent of
   which is logistic regression.

-  **The General Linear Model (GLM).** The GLM is actually a family of
   models that includes logistic regression, linear regression, (some)
   nonlinear regression, ANOVA and many others. The basic idea in the
   GLM is essentially the same idea that underpins linear models, but it
   allows for the idea that your data might not be normally distributed,
   and allows for nonlinear relationships between predictors and
   outcomes. There are a lot of very handy analyses that you can run
   that fall within the GLM, so it’s a very useful thing to know about.

-  **Survival analysis.** In chapter :doc:`A brief introduction to research
   design <../Ch02/Ch02_StudyDesign>`, I talked about “differential attrition”, the
   tendency for people to leave the study in a non-random fashion. Back then,
   I was talking about it as a potential methodological concern, but there are
   a lot of situations in which differential attrition is actually the thing
   you’re interested in. Suppose, for instance, you’re interested in finding
   out how long people play different kinds of computer games in a single
   session. Do people tend to play RTS (real time strategy) games for longer
   stretches than FPS (first person shooter) games? You might design your study
   like this. People come into the lab, and they can play for as long or as
   little as they like. Once they’re finished, you record the time they spent
   playing. However, due to ethical restrictions, let’s suppose that you cannot
   allow them to keep playing longer than two hours. A lot of people will stop
   playing before the two hour limit, so you know exactly how long they played.
   But some people will run into the two hour limit, and so you don’t
   know how long they would have kept playing if you’d been able to
   continue the study. As a consequence, your data are systematically
   *censored*: you’re missing all of the very long times. How do you
   analyse this data sensibly? This is the problem that survival
   analysis solves. It is specifically designed to handle this
   situation, where you’re systematically missing one “side” of the data
   because the study ended. It’s very widely used in health research,
   and in that context it is often literally used to analyse survival.
   For instance, you may be tracking people with a particular type of
   cancer, some who have received treatment A and others who have
   received treatment B, but you only have funding to track them for 5
   years. At the end of the study period some people are alive, others
   are not. In this context, survival analysis is useful for determining
   which treatment is more effective, and telling you about the risk of
   death that people face over time.

-  **Mixed models.** Repeated measures ANOVA is often used in situations
   where you have observations clustered within experimental units. A
   good example of this is when you track individual people across
   multiple time points. Let’s say you’re tracking happiness over time,
   for two people. Aaron’s happiness starts at 10, then drops to 8, and
   then to 6. Belinda’s happiness starts at 6, then rises to 8 and then
   to 10. Both of these two people have the same “overall” level of
   happiness (the average across the three time points is 8), so a
   repeated measures ANOVA analysis would treat Aaron and Belinda the
   same way. But that’s clearly wrong. Aaron’s happiness is decreasing,
   whereas Belinda’s is increasing. If you want to optimally analyse
   data from an experiment where people can change over time, then you
   need a more powerful tool than repeated measures ANOVA. The tools
   that people use to solve this problem are called “mixed” models,
   because they are designed to learn about individual experimental
   units (e.g. happiness of individual people over time) as well as
   overall effects (e.g. the effect of money on happiness over time).
   Repeated measures ANOVA is perhaps the simplest example of a mixed
   model, but there’s a lot you can do with mixed models that you can’t
   do with repeated measures ANOVA.

-  **Multidimensional scaling.** Factor analysis is an example of an
   “unsupervised learning” model. What this means is that, unlike most
   of the “supervised learning” tools I’ve mentioned, you can’t divide
   up your variables into predictors and outcomes. Regression is
   supervised learning whereas factor analysis is unsupervised learning.
   It’s not the only type of unsupervised learning model however. For
   example, in factor analysis one is concerned with the analysis of
   correlations between variables. However, there are many situations
   where you’re actually interested in analysing similarities or
   dissimilarities between objects, items or people. There are a number
   of tools that you can use in this situation, the best known of which
   is multidimensional scaling (MDS). In MDS, the idea is to find a
   “geometric” representation of your items. Each item is “plotted” as a
   point in some space, and the distance between two points is a measure
   of how dissimilar those items are.

-  **Clustering.** Another example of an unsupervised learning model is
   clustering (also referred to as classification), in which you want to
   organise all of your items into meaningful groups, such that similar
   items are assigned to the same groups. A lot of clustering is
   unsupervised, meaning that you don’t know anything about what the
   groups are, you just have to guess. There are other “supervised
   clustering” situations where you need to predict group memberships on
   the basis of other variables, and those group memberships are
   actually observables. Logistic regression is a good example of a tool
   that works this way. However, when you don’t actually know the group
   memberships, you have to use different tools (e.g., k-means clustering).
   There are even situations where you want to do something called “semi-
   supervised clustering”, in which you know the group memberships for some
   items but not others. As you can probably guess, clustering is a pretty
   big topic, and a pretty useful thing to know about.

-  **Causal models.** One thing that I haven’t talked about much in this
   book is how you can use statistical modelling to learn about the
   causal relationships between variables. For instance, consider the
   following three variables which might be of interest when thinking
   about how someone died in a firing squad. We might want to measure
   whether or not an execution order was given (variable A), whether or
   not a marksman fired their gun (variable B), and whether or not the
   person got hit with a bullet (variable C). These three variables are
   all correlated with one another (e.g., there is a correlation between
   guns being fired and people getting hit with bullets), but we
   actually want to make stronger statements about them than merely
   talking about correlations. We want to talk about causation. We want
   to be able to say that the execution order (A) causes the marksman to
   fire (B) which causes someone to get shot (C). We can express this by
   a directed arrow notation: we write it as A → B → C. This “causal chain”
   is a fundamentally different explanation for events than one in which the
   marksman fires first, which causes the shooting B → C, and then causes
   the executioner to “retroactively” issue the execution order, B → A.
   This “common effect” model says that A and C are both caused by B.
   You can see why these are different. In the first causal model, if we
   had managed to stop the executioner from issuing the order
   (intervening to change A), then no shooting would have happened. In
   the second model, the shooting would have happened any way because
   the marksman was *not* following the execution order. There is a big
   literature in statistics on trying to understand the causal
   relationships between variables, and a number of different tools
   exist to help you test different causal stories about your data. The
   most widely used of these tools (in psychology at least) is
   structural equations modelling (SEM), and at some point I’d like to
   extend the book to talk about it.

Of course, even this listing is incomplete. I haven’t mentioned time
series analysis, item response theory, market basket analysis,
classification and regression trees, or any of a huge range of other
topics. However, the list that I’ve given above is essentially my wish
list for this book. Sure, it would double the length of the book, but it
would mean that the scope has become broad enough to cover most things
that applied researchers in psychology would need to use.

Commit message:

Fixing figures for the version 0.75 of the lsj-book and adding symbols / icons (continuous, nominal, ordinal, ID) for measurement level

Ch17/Ch17_Epilogue_2.rst, after:

.. sectionauthor:: `Danielle J. Navarro <https://djnavarro.net/>`_ and `David R. Foxcroft <https://www.davidfoxcroft.com/>`_

Statistical models missing from the book
----------------------------------------

Statistics is a huge field. The core tools that I’ve described in this book
(χ²-tests, t-tests, regression and ANOVA) are basic tools that are widely used
in everyday data analysis, and they form the core of most introductory stats
books. However, there are a lot of other tools out there. There are so very
many data analysis situations that these tools don’t cover, and it would be
great to give you a sense of just how much more there is, for example:

-  **Nonlinear regression.** When discussing regression in chapter
   :doc:`Correlation and linear regression <../Ch12/Ch12_Regression>`, we saw that
   regression assumes that the relationship between predictors and outcomes is
   linear. On the other hand, when we talked about the simpler problem
   of correlation, we saw that there exist tools (e.g., Spearman
   correlations) that are able to assess non-linear relationships between
   variables. There are a number of tools in statistics that can be used
   to do non-linear regression. For instance, some non-linear regression
   models assume that the relationship between predictors and outcomes is
   monotonic (e.g., isotonic regression), while others assume that it is
   smooth but not necessarily monotonic (e.g., Lowess regression), while
   others assume that the relationship is of a known form that happens to
   be nonlinear (e.g., polynomial regression).

-  **Logistic regression.** Yet another variation on regression occurs when the
   outcome variable is binary |nominal|, multinomial |nominal| (several groups)
   or ordinal |ordinal|, but the predictors are continuous |continuous|. For
   instance, suppose you’re investigating social media, and you want to know if
   it’s possible to predict whether or not someone is on Twitter as a function
   of their income, their age, and a range of other variables. This is
   basically a regression model, but you can’t use regular linear regression
   because the outcome variable is categorical (e.g., whether you’re either on
   Twitter or you’re not). Because the outcome variable is categorical, there’s
   no way that the residuals could possibly be normally distributed. There are
   a number of tools that statisticians can apply to this situation, the most
   prominent of which is logistic regression.

-  **The General Linear Model (GLM).** The GLM is actually a family of
   models that includes logistic regression, linear regression, (some)
   nonlinear regression, ANOVA and many others. The basic idea in the
   GLM is essentially the same idea that underpins linear models, but it
   allows for the idea that your data might not be normally distributed,
   and allows for nonlinear relationships between predictors and
   outcomes. There are a lot of very handy analyses that you can run
   that fall within the GLM, so it’s a very useful thing to know about.

-  **Survival analysis.** In chapter :doc:`A brief introduction to research
   design <../Ch02/Ch02_StudyDesign>`, I talked about “differential attrition”, the
   tendency for people to leave the study in a non-random fashion. Back then,
   I was talking about it as a potential methodological concern, but there are
   a lot of situations in which differential attrition is actually the thing
   you’re interested in. Suppose, for instance, you’re interested in finding
   out how long people play different kinds of computer games in a single
   session. Do people tend to play RTS (real time strategy) games for longer
   stretches than FPS (first person shooter) games? You might design your study
   like this. People come into the lab, and they can play for as long or as
   little as they like. Once they’re finished, you record the time they spent
   playing. However, due to ethical restrictions, let’s suppose that you cannot
   allow them to keep playing longer than two hours. A lot of people will stop
   playing before the two hour limit, so you know exactly how long they played.
   But some people will run into the two hour limit, and so you don’t
   know how long they would have kept playing if you’d been able to
   continue the study. As a consequence, your data are systematically
   *censored*: you’re missing all of the very long times. How do you
   analyse this data sensibly? This is the problem that survival
   analysis solves. It is specifically designed to handle this
   situation, where you’re systematically missing one “side” of the data
   because the study ended. It’s very widely used in health research,
   and in that context it is often literally used to analyse survival.
   For instance, you may be tracking people with a particular type of
   cancer, some who have received treatment A and others who have
   received treatment B, but you only have funding to track them for 5
   years. At the end of the study period some people are alive, others
   are not. In this context, survival analysis is useful for determining
   which treatment is more effective, and telling you about the risk of
   death that people face over time.

-  **Mixed models.** Repeated measures ANOVA is often used in situations
   where you have observations clustered within experimental units. A
   good example of this is when you track individual people across
   multiple time points. Let’s say you’re tracking happiness over time,
   for two people. Aaron’s happiness starts at 10, then drops to 8, and
   then to 6. Belinda’s happiness starts at 6, then rises to 8 and then
   to 10. Both of these two people have the same “overall” level of
   happiness (the average across the three time points is 8), so a
   repeated measures ANOVA analysis would treat Aaron and Belinda the
   same way. But that’s clearly wrong. Aaron’s happiness is decreasing,
   whereas Belinda’s is increasing. If you want to optimally analyse
   data from an experiment where people can change over time, then you
   need a more powerful tool than repeated measures ANOVA. The tools
   that people use to solve this problem are called “mixed” models,
   because they are designed to learn about individual experimental
   units (e.g. happiness of individual people over time) as well as
   overall effects (e.g. the effect of money on happiness over time).
   Repeated measures ANOVA is perhaps the simplest example of a mixed
   model, but there’s a lot you can do with mixed models that you can’t
   do with repeated measures ANOVA.

-  **Multidimensional scaling.** Factor analysis is an example of an
   “unsupervised learning” model. What this means is that, unlike most
   of the “supervised learning” tools I’ve mentioned, you can’t divide
   up your variables into predictors and outcomes. Regression is
   supervised learning whereas factor analysis is unsupervised learning.
   It’s not the only type of unsupervised learning model however. For
   example, in factor analysis one is concerned with the analysis of
   correlations between variables. However, there are many situations
   where you’re actually interested in analysing similarities or
   dissimilarities between objects, items or people. There are a number
   of tools that you can use in this situation, the best known of which
   is multidimensional scaling (MDS). In MDS, the idea is to find a
   “geometric” representation of your items. Each item is “plotted” as a
   point in some space, and the distance between two points is a measure
   of how dissimilar those items are.

-  **Clustering.** Another example of an unsupervised learning model is
   clustering (also referred to as classification), in which you want to
   organise all of your items into meaningful groups, such that similar
   items are assigned to the same groups. A lot of clustering is
   unsupervised, meaning that you don’t know anything about what the
   groups are, you just have to guess. There are other “supervised
   clustering” situations where you need to predict group memberships on
   the basis of other variables, and those group memberships are
   actually observables. Logistic regression is a good example of a tool
   that works this way. However, when you don’t actually know the group
   memberships, you have to use different tools (e.g., k-means clustering).
   There are even situations where you want to do something called “semi-
   supervised clustering”, in which you know the group memberships for some
   items but not others. As you can probably guess, clustering is a pretty
   big topic, and a pretty useful thing to know about.

-  **Causal models.** One thing that I haven’t talked about much in this
   book is how you can use statistical modelling to learn about the
   causal relationships between variables. For instance, consider the
   following three variables which might be of interest when thinking
   about how someone died in a firing squad. We might want to measure
   whether or not an execution order was given (variable A), whether or
   not a marksman fired their gun (variable B), and whether or not the
   person got hit with a bullet (variable C). These three variables are
   all correlated with one another (e.g., there is a correlation between
   guns being fired and people getting hit with bullets), but we
   actually want to make stronger statements about them than merely
   talking about correlations. We want to talk about causation. We want
   to be able to say that the execution order (A) causes the marksman to
   fire (B) which causes someone to get shot (C). We can express this by
   a directed arrow notation: we write it as A → B → C. This “causal chain”
   is a fundamentally different explanation for events than one in which the
   marksman fires first, which causes the shooting B → C, and then causes
   the executioner to “retroactively” issue the execution order, B → A.
   This “common effect” model says that A and C are both caused by B.
   You can see why these are different. In the first causal model, if we
   had managed to stop the executioner from issuing the order
   (intervening to change A), then no shooting would have happened. In
   the second model, the shooting would have happened any way because
   the marksman was *not* following the execution order. There is a big
   literature in statistics on trying to understand the causal
   relationships between variables, and a number of different tools
   exist to help you test different causal stories about your data. The
   most widely used of these tools (in psychology at least) is
   structural equations modelling (SEM), and at some point I’d like to
   extend the book to talk about it.

Of course, even this listing is incomplete. I haven’t mentioned time
series analysis, item response theory, market basket analysis,
classification and regression trees, or any of a huge range of other
topics. However, the list that I’ve given above is essentially my wish
list for this book. Sure, it would double the length of the book, but it
would mean that the scope has become broad enough to cover most things
that applied researchers in psychology would need to use.

.. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

.. |continuous|                       image:: ../_images/variable-continuous.*
   :width: 16px
 
.. |nominal|                          image:: ../_images/variable-nominal.*
   :width: 16px

.. |ordinal|                          image:: ../_images/variable-ordinal.*
   :width: 16px
