.. sectionauthor:: `Danielle J. Navarro <https://djnavarro.net/>`_ and `David R. Foxcroft <https://www.davidfoxcroft.com/>`_

Bayesian statistics
===================

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1
   :hidden:
   
   Ch16_Bayes_1
   Ch16_Bayes_2
   Ch16_Bayes_3
   Ch16_Bayes_4
   Ch16_Bayes_5


.. epigraph::

   | *In our reasonings concerning matter of fact, there are all imaginable
     degrees of assurance, from the highest certainty to the lowest species of
     moral evidence. A wise man, therefore, proportions his belief to the
     evidence.*
     
   -- `David Hume <https://en.wikiquote.org/wiki/David_Hume>`__

The ideas I have presented to you in this book describe inferential statistics
from the frequentist perspective. I am not alone in doing this. In fact, almost
every textbook given to undergraduate psychology students presents the opinions
of the frequentist statistician as *the* theory of inferential statistics, the
one true way to do things. I have taught this way for practical reasons. The
frequentist view of statistics dominated the academic field of statistics for
most of the 20th century, and this dominance is even more extreme among applied
scientists. It was and is current practice among psychologists to use
frequentist methods. Because frequentist methods are ubiquitous in scientific
papers, every student of statistics needs to understand those methods,
otherwise they will be unable to make sense of what those papers are saying!
Unfortunately, in my opinion at least, the current practice in psychology is
often misguided and the reliance on frequentist methods is partly to blame. In
this chapter I explain why I think this and provide an introduction to Bayesian
statistics, an approach that I think is generally superior to the orthodox
approach.

This chapter comes in two parts: In sectionsÂ :doc:`Ch16_Bayes_1` through
:doc:`Ch16_Bayes_3` I talk about what Bayesian statistics are all about,
covering the basic mathematical rules for how it works as well as an
explanation for why I think the Bayesian approach is so useful. Afterwards,
I provide a brief overview of how you can do :doc:`Bayesian versions of
*t*-tests <Ch16_Bayes_5>`.
