Ch11/Ch11_tTest_09.rst, before:

.. sectionauthor:: `Danielle J. Navarro <https://djnavarro.net/>`_ and `David R. Foxcroft <https://www.davidfoxcroft.com/>`_

Testing non-normal data with Wilcoxon tests
-------------------------------------------

Okay, suppose your data turn out to be pretty substantially non-normal,
but you still want to run something like a *t*-test? This
situation occurs a lot in real life. For the AFL winning margins data,
for instance, the Shapiro-Wilk test made it very clear that the
normality assumption is violated. This is the situation where you want
to use Wilcoxon tests.

Like the *t*-test, the Wilcoxon test comes in two forms,
one-sample and two-sample, and they’re used in more or less the exact
same situations as the corresponding *t*-tests. Unlike the
*t*-test, the Wilcoxon test doesn’t assume normality, which is
nice. In fact, they don’t make any assumptions about what kind of
distribution is involved. In statistical jargon, this makes them
**nonparametric tests**. While avoiding the normality assumption is
nice, there’s a drawback: the Wilcoxon test is usually less powerful
than the *t*-test (i.e., higher Type II error rate). I won’t
discuss the Wilcoxon tests in as much detail as the *t*-tests, but
I’ll give you a brief overview.

Two sample Mann-Whitney U test
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

I’ll start by describing the **Mann-Whitney U test**, since it’s
actually simpler than the one sample version. Suppose we’re looking at
the scores of 10 people on some test. Since my imagination has now
failed me completely, let’s pretend it’s a “test of awesomeness” and
there are two groups of people, “A” and “B”. I’m curious to know which
group is more awesome. The data are included in the |awesome|_ data set,
and there are two variables apart from the usual ``ID`` variable:
``scores`` and ``group``.

As long as there are no ties (i.e., people with the exact same
awesomeness score) then the test that we want to do is surprisingly
simple. All we have to do is construct a table that compares every
observation in group A against every observation in group B. Whenever
the group A datum is larger, we place a check mark in the table:

+--------------------+----------------------------------+
|                    |           **Group B**            |
|                    +------+------+------+------+------+
|                    | 14.5 | 10.4 | 12.4 | 11.7 | 13.0 |
+-------------+------+------+------+------+------+------+
|             |  6.4 |      |      |      |      |      |
|             +------+------+------+------+------+------+
|             | 10.7 |      | ✓    |      |      |      |
|             +------+------+------+------+------+------+
| **Group A** | 11.9 |      | ✓    |      | ✓    |      |
|             +------+------+------+------+------+------+
|             |  7.3 |      |      |      |      |      |
|             +------+------+------+------+------+------+
|             | 10.0 |      |      |      |      |      |
+-------------+------+------+------+------+------+------+

We then count up the number of checkmarks. This is our test statistic,
*W*.\ [#]_ The actual sampling distribution for *W* is somewhat complicated,
and I’ll skip the details. For our purposes, it’s sufficient to note that the
interpretation of *W* is qualitatively the same as the interpretation of *t*
or *z*. That is, if we want a two-sided test then we reject the null hypothesis
when *W* is very large or very small, but if we have a directional (i.e.,
one-sided) hypothesis then we only use one or the other.

In jamovi, if we run an ``Independent Samples t-Test`` with ``scores`` as
the dependent variable. and ``group`` as the grouping variable, and then
under the options for ``Tests`` check the option for ``Mann-Whitney U``, we
will get results showing that U = 3 (i.e., the same number of check marks
as shown above), and a p-value = 0.05556.

One sample Wilcoxon test
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

What about the **one sample Wilcoxon test** (or equivalently, the paired
samples Wilcoxon test)? Suppose I’m interested in finding out whether
taking a statistics class has any effect on the happiness of students. The
|happiness|_ data set contains the happiness of each student ``before`` taking
the class and ``after`` taking the class. The ``change`` score is the
difference between the two. Just like we saw with the *t*-test, there’s no
fundamental difference between doing a paired-samples test using ``before`` and
``after``, versus doing a one-sample test using the ``change`` scores.
As before, the simplest way to think about the test is to construct a
tabulation. The way to do it this time is to take those change scores
that are positive differences, and tabulate them against all the
complete sample. What you end up with is a table that looks like this:

+--------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------+
|                          |                      all differences                      |
+                          +-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+
|                          | -24 | -14 | -10 |   7 |  -6 | -38 |   2 | -35 | -30 |   5 |
+----------------------+---+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+
|                      | 7 |     |     |     | ✓   | ✓   |     | ✓   |     |     | ✓   |   
| positive differences | 2 |     |     |     |     |     |     | ✓   |     |     |     |
|                      | 5 |     |     |     |     |     |     | ✓   |     |     | ✓   |
+----------------------+---+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+

Counting up the tick marks this time we get a test statistic of *W* = 7.
As before, if our test is two-sided, then we reject the null hypothesis
when *W* is very large or very small. As far as running it in jamovi goes,
it’s pretty much what you’d expect. For the one-sample version, you specify
the ``Wilcoxon rank`` option under ``Tests`` in the ``One Sample *t*-Test``
analysis panel.This gives you Wilcoxon *W* = 7, *p*-value = 0.03711. As this
shows, we have a significant effect. Evidently, taking a statistics class
does have an effect on your happiness. Switching to a paired samples version
of the test won’t give us a different answer, of course; see
:numref:`fig-ttest_nonparametric`.

.. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

.. _fig-ttest_nonparametric:
.. figure:: ../_images/lsj_ttest_nonparametric.*
   :alt: Results for one sample and paired sample Wilcoxon non-parametric tests

   jamovi screen showing results for one sample and paired sample Wilcoxon
   non-parametric tests
   
.. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

------

.. [#]
   Actually, there are two different versions of the test statistic that differ
   from each other by a constant value. The version that I’ve described is the
   one that jamovi calculates.

.. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

.. |awesome|                           replace:: ``awesome``
.. _awesome:                           _static/data/awesome.omv

.. |happiness|                         replace:: ``happiness``
.. _happiness:                         _static/data/happiness.omv

Commit message:

Fixing figures for the version 0.75 of the lsj-book and adding symbols / icons (continuous, nominal, ordinal, ID) for measurement level

Ch11/Ch11_tTest_09.rst, after:

.. sectionauthor:: `Danielle J. Navarro <https://djnavarro.net/>`_ and `David R. Foxcroft <https://www.davidfoxcroft.com/>`_

Testing non-normal data with Wilcoxon tests
-------------------------------------------

Okay, suppose your data turn out to be pretty substantially non-normal,
but you still want to run something like a *t*-test? This
situation occurs a lot in real life. For the AFL winning margins data,
for instance, the Shapiro-Wilk test made it very clear that the
normality assumption is violated. This is the situation where you want
to use Wilcoxon tests.

Like the *t*-test, the Wilcoxon test comes in two forms,
one-sample and two-sample, and they’re used in more or less the exact
same situations as the corresponding *t*-tests. Unlike the
*t*-test, the Wilcoxon test doesn’t assume normality, which is
nice. In fact, they don’t make any assumptions about what kind of
distribution is involved. In statistical jargon, this makes them
**nonparametric tests**. While avoiding the normality assumption is
nice, there’s a drawback: the Wilcoxon test is usually less powerful
than the *t*-test (i.e., higher Type II error rate). I won’t
discuss the Wilcoxon tests in as much detail as the *t*-tests, but
I’ll give you a brief overview.

Two sample Mann-Whitney U test
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

I’ll start by describing the **Mann-Whitney U test**, since it’s
actually simpler than the one sample version. Suppose we’re looking at
the scores of 10 people on some test. Since my imagination has now
failed me completely, let’s pretend it’s a “test of awesomeness” and
there are two groups of people, “A” and “B”. I’m curious to know which
group is more awesome. The data are included in the |awesome|_ data set,
and there are two variables apart from the usual ``ID`` variable:
``scores`` |continuous| and ``group`` |nominal|.

As long as there are no ties (i.e., people with the exact same
awesomeness score) then the test that we want to do is surprisingly
simple. All we have to do is construct a table that compares every
observation in group A against every observation in group B. Whenever
the group A datum is larger, we place a check mark in the table:

+--------------------+----------------------------------+
|                    |           **Group B**            |
|                    +------+------+------+------+------+
|                    | 14.5 | 10.4 | 12.4 | 11.7 | 13.0 |
+-------------+------+------+------+------+------+------+
|             |  6.4 |      |      |      |      |      |
|             +------+------+------+------+------+------+
|             | 10.7 |      | ✓    |      |      |      |
|             +------+------+------+------+------+------+
| **Group A** | 11.9 |      | ✓    |      | ✓    |      |
|             +------+------+------+------+------+------+
|             |  7.3 |      |      |      |      |      |
|             +------+------+------+------+------+------+
|             | 10.0 |      |      |      |      |      |
+-------------+------+------+------+------+------+------+

We then count up the number of checkmarks. This is our test statistic,
*W*.\ [#]_ The actual sampling distribution for *W* is somewhat complicated,
and I’ll skip the details. For our purposes, it’s sufficient to note that the
interpretation of *W* is qualitatively the same as the interpretation of *t*
or *z*. That is, if we want a two-sided test then we reject the null hypothesis
when *W* is very large or very small, but if we have a directional (i.e.,
one-sided) hypothesis then we only use one or the other.

In jamovi, if we run an ``Independent Samples t-Test`` with ``scores``
|continuous| as the dependent variable. and ``group`` as the grouping variable
|nominal|, and then under the options for ``Tests`` check the option for
``Mann-Whitney U``, we will get results showing that U = 3 (i.e., the same
number of check marks as shown above), and a p-value = 0.05556.

One sample Wilcoxon test
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

What about the **one sample Wilcoxon test** (or equivalently, the paired 
samples Wilcoxon test)? Suppose I’m interested in finding out whether taking a
statistics class has any effect on the happiness of students. The |happiness|_
data set contains the happiness of each student ``before`` taking the class
|ordinal| and ``after`` taking the class |ordinal|. The ``change`` score is the
difference between the two. Just like we saw with the *t*-test, there’s no
fundamental difference between doing a paired-samples test using ``before`` and
``after``, versus doing a one-sample test using the ``change`` scores. As
before, the simplest way to think about the test is to construct a tabulation.
The way to do it this time is to take those change scores that are positive
differences, and tabulate them against all the complete sample. What you end up
with is a table that looks like this:

+--------------------------+-----------------------------------------------------------+
|                          |                      all differences                      |
+                          +-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+
|                          | -24 | -14 | -10 |   7 |  -6 | -38 |   2 | -35 | -30 |   5 |
+----------------------+---+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+
|                      | 7 |     |     |     | ✓   | ✓   |     | ✓   |     |     | ✓   |   
| positive differences | 2 |     |     |     |     |     |     | ✓   |     |     |     |
|                      | 5 |     |     |     |     |     |     | ✓   |     |     | ✓   |
+----------------------+---+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+-----+

Counting up the tick marks this time we get a test statistic of *W* = 7.
As before, if our test is two-sided, then we reject the null hypothesis
when *W* is very large or very small. As far as running it in jamovi goes,
it’s pretty much what you’d expect. For the one-sample version, you specify
the ``Wilcoxon rank`` option under ``Tests`` in the ``One Sample *t*-Test``
analysis panel.This gives you Wilcoxon *W* = 7, *p*-value = 0.03711. As this
shows, we have a significant effect. Evidently, taking a statistics class
does have an effect on your happiness. Switching to a paired samples version
of the test won’t give us a different answer, of course; see
:numref:`fig-ttest_nonparametric`.

.. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

.. _fig-ttest_nonparametric:
.. figure:: ../_images/lsj_ttest_nonparametric.*
   :alt: Results for one sample and paired sample Wilcoxon non-parametric tests

   jamovi screen showing results for one sample and paired sample Wilcoxon
   non-parametric tests
   
.. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

------

.. [#]
   Actually, there are two different versions of the test statistic that differ
   from each other by a constant value. The version that I’ve described is the
   one that jamovi calculates.

.. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

.. |awesome|                           replace:: ``awesome``
.. _awesome:                           _static/data/awesome.omv

.. |happiness|                         replace:: ``happiness``
.. _happiness:                         _static/data/happiness.omv

.. |continuous|                       image:: ../_images/variable-continuous.*
   :width: 16px

.. |nominal|                          image:: ../_images/variable-nominal.*
   :width: 16px
 
.. |ordinal|                          image:: ../_images/variable-ordinal.*
   :width: 16px
