Ch11/Ch11_tTest_08.rst, before:

.. sectionauthor:: `Danielle J. Navarro <https://djnavarro.net/>`_ and `David R. Foxcroft <https://www.davidfoxcroft.com/>`_

Checking the normality of a sample
----------------------------------

All of the tests that we have discussed so far in this chapter have assumed
that the data are normally distributed. This assumption is often quite
reasonable, because :doc:`the central limit theorem <../Ch08/Ch08_Estimation_3>` does
tend to ensure that many real world quantities are normally distributed. Any
time that you suspect that your variable is *actually* an average of lots of
different things, there’s a pretty good chance that it will be normally
distributed, or at least close enough to normal that you can get away with
using *t*-tests. However, life doesn’t come with guarantees, and besides there
are lots of ways in which you can end up with variables that are highly
non-normal. For example, any time you think that your variable is actually the
minimum of lots of different things, there’s a very good chance it will end up
quite skewed. In psychology, response time (RT) data is a good example of this.
If you suppose that there are lots of things that could trigger a response from
a human participant, then the actual response will occur the first time one of
these trigger events occurs.\ [#]_ This means that RT data are systematically
non-normal. Okay, so if normality is assumed by all the tests, and is mostly
but not always satisfied (at least approximately) by real world data, how can
we check the normality of a sample? In this section I discuss two methods:
QQ plots and the Shapiro-Wilk test.

QQ plots
~~~~~~~~

.. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

.. figure:: ../_images/lsj_qqNormal.*
   :alt: Histogram and QQ plot for normally-distributed data
   :name: fig-qq1

   Histogram (left panel) and QQ plot (right panel) for the ``normal.data``
   data set, a normally-distributed sample with 100 observations. The
   Shapiro-Wilk statistic associated with these data is W = 0.99, indicating
   that no significant departures from normality were detected (*p* = 0.73).
   
.. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

.. figure:: ../_images/lsj_qqSkewedTailed.*
   :alt: Histogram and QQ plot for skewed and tailed data
   :name: fig-qq2

   In the top row, a histogram (top-left panel) and QQ plot (top-right panel)
   of the 100 observations in a ``skewed.data`` data set. The skewness of the
   data here is 1.94, and is reflected in a QQ plot that curves upwards. As a
   consequence, the Shapiro-Wilk statistic is W = 0.80, reflecting a
   significant departure from normality (\ *p* < 0.001). The bottom row shows
   the same plots for a heavy-tailed data set, again consisting of 100
   observations. In this case the heavy tails in the data produce a high
   kurtosis (2.80), and cause the QQ plot to flatten in the middle, and curve
   away sharply on either side. The resulting Shapiro-Wilk statistic is
   W = 0.93, again reflecting a significant deviation from normality (\ *p* <
   0.001).
   
.. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

One way to check whether a sample violates the normality assumption is
to draw a **“QQ plot”** (Quantile-Quantile plot). This allows you to
visually check whether you’re seeing any systematic violations. In a QQ
plot, each observation is plotted as a single dot. The x co-ordinate is
the theoretical quantile that the observation should fall in if the data
were normally distributed (with mean and variance estimated from the
sample), and on the y co-ordinate is the actual quantile of the data
within the sample. If the data are normal, the dots should form a
straight line. For instance, lets see what happens if we generate data
by sampling from a normal distribution, and then drawing a QQ plot. The
results are shown in :numref:`fig-qq1`. As you can see, these data form
a pretty straight line; which is no surprise given that we sampled them
from a normal distribution! In contrast, have a look at the two data sets
shown in :numref:`fig-qq2`. The top panels show the histogram and a QQ
plot for a data set that is highly skewed: the QQ plot curves upwards.
The lower panels show the same plots for a heavy tailed (i.e., high
kurtosis) data set: in this case the QQ plot flattens in the middle and
curves sharply at either end.

Shapiro-Wilk tests
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

QQ plots provide a nice way to informally check the normality of your
data, but sometimes you’ll want to do something a bit more formal and
the **Shapiro-Wilk test** (`Shapiro & Wilk, 1965
<../Other/References.html#shapiro-1965>`__\ ) is probably what you’re looking
for.\ [#]_ As you’d expect, the null hypothesis being tested is that
a set of *N* observations is normally distributed.

The test statistic that it calculates is conventionally denoted as
*W*, and it’s calculated as follows. First, we sort the
observations in order of increasing size, and let *X*\ :sub:`1` be the
smallest value in the sample, *X*\ :sub:`2` be the second smallest and so
on. Then the value of *W* is given by

.. math:: W = \frac{ \left( \sum_{i = 1}^N a_i X_i \right)^2 }{ \sum_{i = 1}^N (X_i - \bar{X})^2}

where *X̄* is the mean of the observations, and the *a*\ :sub:`i` values are
an introductory text.

Because it’s a little hard to explain the maths behind the *W* statistic, a
better idea is to give a broad brush description of how it behaves. Unlike most
... mumble, mumble ... something complicated that is a bit beyond the scope of
of the test statistics that we’ll encounter in this book, it’s actually *small*
values of *W* that indicate departure from normality. The *W* statistic has a
maximum value of 1, which occurs when the data look “perfectly normal”. The
smaller the value of *W* the less normal the data are. However, the sampling
distribution for *W*, which is not one of the standard ones that I discussed in
chapter :doc:`Introduction to probability <../Ch07/Ch07_Probability>` and is in fact a
complete pain in the arse to work with, does depend on the sample size *N*. To
give you a feel for what these sampling distributions look like, I’ve plotted
three of them in :numref:`fig-swdist`. Notice that, as the sample size starts
to get large, the sampling distribution becomes very tightly clumped up near
*W* = 1, and as a consequence, for larger samples *W* doesn’t have to be very
much smaller than 1 in order for the test to be significant.

.. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

.. figure:: ../_images/lsj_shapirowilkdist.*
   :alt: Sampling distribution of the Shapiro-Wilk W statistic
   :name: fig-swdist

   Sampling distribution of the Shapiro-Wilk W statistic, under the null
   hypothesis that the data are normally-distributed, for samples of size 10,
   20 and 50. Note that small values of W indicate departure from normality.
   
.. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

To get the Shapiro-Wilk statistic in jamovi *t*-tests, check the option for
``Normality`` listed under ``Assumptions``. In the randomly sampled data
(*N* = 100) we used for the QQ plot, the value for the Shapiro-Wilk normality
test statistic was W = 0.99 with a *p*-value of 0.69. So, not surprisingly, we
have no evidence that these data depart from normality. When reporting the
results for a Shapiro-Wilk test, you should (as usual) make sure to include the
test statistic *W* and the *p*-value, though given that the sampling
distribution depends so heavily on *N* it would probably be a politeness to
include *N* as well.

Example
~~~~~~~

In the meantime, it’s probably worth showing you an example of what happens to
the QQ plot and the Shapiro-Wilk test when the data turn out to be non-normal.
For that, let’s look at the distribution of our AFL winning margins data
(``aflsmall_margins``), which if you remember back to th chapter on
:doc:`Descriptive statistics <../Ch04/Ch04_Descriptives>` didn’t look like they came
from a normal distribution at all. Here’s what happens to the QQ plot:

.. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

.. figure:: ../_images/lsj_qq_2b.*
   :alt: QQ plot for the data (skewed) data from the aflsmall_margins dataset
   :name: fig-qq_2b

   QQ plot for the data (skewed) data from the |aflsmall_margins|_ data set
   
.. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

And when we run the Shapiro-Wilk test on the AFL margins data, we get a
value for the Shapiro-Wilk normality test statistic of W = 0.94, and
*p*-value = 9.481e-07. Clearly a significant effect!

------

.. [#]
   This is a massive oversimplification.

.. [#]
   Either that, or the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test, which is probably more
   traditional than the Shapiro-Wilk. Although most things I’ve read seem to
   suggest Shapiro-Wilk is the better test of normality, the
   Kolomogorov-Smirnov is a general purpose test of distributional equivalence
   that can be adapted to handle other kinds of distribution tests. In jamovi
   the Shapiro-Wilk test is preferred.

.. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

.. |aflsmall_margins|                  replace:: ``aflsmall_margins``
.. _aflsmall_margins:                  _static/data/aflsmall_margins.omv

Commit message:

Adjusting the naming of the afl.margins variable and the aflsmall_-data-sets for consistency

Ch11/Ch11_tTest_08.rst, after:

.. sectionauthor:: `Danielle J. Navarro <https://djnavarro.net/>`_ and `David R. Foxcroft <https://www.davidfoxcroft.com/>`_

Checking the normality of a sample
----------------------------------

All of the tests that we have discussed so far in this chapter have assumed
that the data are normally distributed. This assumption is often quite
reasonable, because :doc:`the central limit theorem <../Ch08/Ch08_Estimation_3>` does
tend to ensure that many real world quantities are normally distributed. Any
time that you suspect that your variable is *actually* an average of lots of
different things, there’s a pretty good chance that it will be normally
distributed, or at least close enough to normal that you can get away with
using *t*-tests. However, life doesn’t come with guarantees, and besides there
are lots of ways in which you can end up with variables that are highly
non-normal. For example, any time you think that your variable is actually the
minimum of lots of different things, there’s a very good chance it will end up
quite skewed. In psychology, response time (RT) data is a good example of this.
If you suppose that there are lots of things that could trigger a response from
a human participant, then the actual response will occur the first time one of
these trigger events occurs.\ [#]_ This means that RT data are systematically
non-normal. Okay, so if normality is assumed by all the tests, and is mostly
but not always satisfied (at least approximately) by real world data, how can
we check the normality of a sample? In this section I discuss two methods:
QQ plots and the Shapiro-Wilk test.

QQ plots
~~~~~~~~

.. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

.. figure:: ../_images/lsj_qqNormal.*
   :alt: Histogram and QQ plot for normally-distributed data
   :name: fig-qq1

   Histogram (left panel) and QQ plot (right panel) for the ``normal.data``
   data set, a normally-distributed sample with 100 observations. The
   Shapiro-Wilk statistic associated with these data is W = 0.99, indicating
   that no significant departures from normality were detected (*p* = 0.73).
   
.. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

.. figure:: ../_images/lsj_qqSkewedTailed.*
   :alt: Histogram and QQ plot for skewed and tailed data
   :name: fig-qq2

   In the top row, a histogram (top-left panel) and QQ plot (top-right panel)
   of the 100 observations in a ``skewed.data`` data set. The skewness of the
   data here is 1.94, and is reflected in a QQ plot that curves upwards. As a
   consequence, the Shapiro-Wilk statistic is W = 0.80, reflecting a
   significant departure from normality (\ *p* < 0.001). The bottom row shows
   the same plots for a heavy-tailed data set, again consisting of 100
   observations. In this case the heavy tails in the data produce a high
   kurtosis (2.80), and cause the QQ plot to flatten in the middle, and curve
   away sharply on either side. The resulting Shapiro-Wilk statistic is
   W = 0.93, again reflecting a significant deviation from normality (\ *p* <
   0.001).
   
.. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

One way to check whether a sample violates the normality assumption is
to draw a **“QQ plot”** (Quantile-Quantile plot). This allows you to
visually check whether you’re seeing any systematic violations. In a QQ
plot, each observation is plotted as a single dot. The x co-ordinate is
the theoretical quantile that the observation should fall in if the data
were normally distributed (with mean and variance estimated from the
sample), and on the y co-ordinate is the actual quantile of the data
within the sample. If the data are normal, the dots should form a
straight line. For instance, lets see what happens if we generate data
by sampling from a normal distribution, and then drawing a QQ plot. The
results are shown in :numref:`fig-qq1`. As you can see, these data form
a pretty straight line; which is no surprise given that we sampled them
from a normal distribution! In contrast, have a look at the two data sets
shown in :numref:`fig-qq2`. The top panels show the histogram and a QQ
plot for a data set that is highly skewed: the QQ plot curves upwards.
The lower panels show the same plots for a heavy tailed (i.e., high
kurtosis) data set: in this case the QQ plot flattens in the middle and
curves sharply at either end.

Shapiro-Wilk tests
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

QQ plots provide a nice way to informally check the normality of your
data, but sometimes you’ll want to do something a bit more formal and
the **Shapiro-Wilk test** (`Shapiro & Wilk, 1965
<../Other/References.html#shapiro-1965>`__\ ) is probably what you’re looking
for.\ [#]_ As you’d expect, the null hypothesis being tested is that
a set of *N* observations is normally distributed.

The test statistic that it calculates is conventionally denoted as
*W*, and it’s calculated as follows. First, we sort the
observations in order of increasing size, and let *X*\ :sub:`1` be the
smallest value in the sample, *X*\ :sub:`2` be the second smallest and so
on. Then the value of *W* is given by

.. math:: W = \frac{ \left( \sum_{i = 1}^N a_i X_i \right)^2 }{ \sum_{i = 1}^N (X_i - \bar{X})^2}

where *X̄* is the mean of the observations, and the *a*\ :sub:`i` values are
an introductory text.

Because it’s a little hard to explain the maths behind the *W* statistic, a
better idea is to give a broad brush description of how it behaves. Unlike most
... mumble, mumble ... something complicated that is a bit beyond the scope of
of the test statistics that we’ll encounter in this book, it’s actually *small*
values of *W* that indicate departure from normality. The *W* statistic has a
maximum value of 1, which occurs when the data look “perfectly normal”. The
smaller the value of *W* the less normal the data are. However, the sampling
distribution for *W*, which is not one of the standard ones that I discussed in
chapter :doc:`Introduction to probability <../Ch07/Ch07_Probability>` and is in fact a
complete pain in the arse to work with, does depend on the sample size *N*. To
give you a feel for what these sampling distributions look like, I’ve plotted
three of them in :numref:`fig-swdist`. Notice that, as the sample size starts
to get large, the sampling distribution becomes very tightly clumped up near
*W* = 1, and as a consequence, for larger samples *W* doesn’t have to be very
much smaller than 1 in order for the test to be significant.

.. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

.. figure:: ../_images/lsj_shapirowilkdist.*
   :alt: Sampling distribution of the Shapiro-Wilk W statistic
   :name: fig-swdist

   Sampling distribution of the Shapiro-Wilk W statistic, under the null
   hypothesis that the data are normally-distributed, for samples of size 10,
   20 and 50. Note that small values of W indicate departure from normality.
   
.. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

To get the Shapiro-Wilk statistic in jamovi *t*-tests, check the option for
``Normality`` listed under ``Assumptions``. In the randomly sampled data
(*N* = 100) we used for the QQ plot, the value for the Shapiro-Wilk normality
test statistic was W = 0.99 with a *p*-value of 0.69. So, not surprisingly, we
have no evidence that these data depart from normality. When reporting the
results for a Shapiro-Wilk test, you should (as usual) make sure to include the
test statistic *W* and the *p*-value, though given that the sampling
distribution depends so heavily on *N* it would probably be a politeness to
include *N* as well.

Example
~~~~~~~

In the meantime, it’s probably worth showing you an example of what happens to
the QQ plot and the Shapiro-Wilk test when the data turn out to be non-normal.
For that, let’s look at the distribution of our AFL winning margins
(``afl.margins``) variable (from the |aflsmall_margins|_ data set), which if
you remember back to th chapter on
:doc:`Descriptive statistics <../Ch04/Ch04_Descriptives>` didn’t look like they
came from a normal distribution at all. Here’s what happens to the QQ plot:

.. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

.. figure:: ../_images/lsj_qq_2b.*
   :alt: QQ plot for the data (skewed) data in the ``afl.margins`` variable
         of the |aflsmall_margins| dataset
   :name: fig-qq_2b

   QQ plot for the (skewed) data in the ``afl.margins`` variable of the
   |aflsmall_margins|_ data set
   
.. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

And when we run the Shapiro-Wilk test on the AFL margins data, we get a
value for the Shapiro-Wilk normality test statistic of W = 0.94, and
*p*-value = 9.481e-07. Clearly a significant effect!

------

.. [#]
   This is a massive oversimplification.

.. [#]
   Either that, or the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test, which is probably more
   traditional than the Shapiro-Wilk. Although most things I’ve read seem to
   suggest Shapiro-Wilk is the better test of normality, the
   Kolomogorov-Smirnov is a general purpose test of distributional equivalence
   that can be adapted to handle other kinds of distribution tests. In jamovi
   the Shapiro-Wilk test is preferred.

.. ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

.. |aflsmall_margins|                  replace:: ``aflsmall_margins``
.. _aflsmall_margins:                  _static/data/aflsmall_margins.omv
