.. sectionauthor:: `Danielle J. Navarro <https://djnavarro.net/>`_ and `David R. Foxcroft <https://www.davidfoxcroft.com/>`_

Introduction to psychological measurement
-----------------------------------------

The first thing to understand is data collection can be thought of as a
kind of **measurement**. That is, what we’re trying to do here is
measure something about human behaviour or the human mind. What do I
mean by “measurement”?

Measurement itself is a subtle concept, but basically it comes down to
finding some way of assigning numbers, or labels, or some other kind of
well-defined descriptions, to “stuff”. So, any of the following would
count as a psychological measurement:

-  My **age** is *33 years*.

-  I *do not* **like anchovies**.

-  My **chromosomal gender** is *male*.

-  My **self-identified gender** is *male*.\ [#]_

In the short list above, the **bolded part** is “the thing to be
measured”, and the *italicised part* is “the measurement itself”. In
fact, we can expand on this a little bit, by thinking about the set of
possible measurements that could have arisen in each case:

-  My **age** (in years) could have been *0, 1, 2, 3 …*, etc. The upper
   bound on what my age could possibly be is a bit fuzzy, but in
   practice you’d be safe in saying that the largest possible age is
   *150*, since no human has ever lived that long.

-  When asked if I **like anchovies**, I might have said that *I do*, or
   *I do not*, or *I have no opinion*, or *I sometimes do*.

-  My **chromosomal gender** is almost certainly going to be *male (XY)*
   or *female (XX)*, but there are a few other possibilities. I could
   also have *Klinfelter’s syndrome (XXY)*, which is more similar to
   male than to female. And I imagine there are other possibilities too.

-  My **self-identified gender** is also very likely to be *male* or
   *female*, but it doesn’t have to agree with my chromosomal gender. I
   may also choose to identify with *neither*, or to explicitly call
   myself *transgender*.

As you can see, for some things (like age) it seems fairly obvious what
the set of possible measurements should be, whereas for other things it
gets a bit tricky. But I want to point out that even in the case of
someone’s age it’s much more subtle than this. For instance, in the
example above I assumed that it was okay to measure age in years. But if
you’re a developmental psychologist, that’s way too crude, and so you
often measure age in *years and months* (if a child is 2 years and 11
months this is usually written as “2;11”). If you’re interested in
newborns you might want to measure age in *days since birth*, maybe even
*hours since birth*. In other words, the way in which you specify the
allowable measurement values is important.

Looking at this a bit more closely, you might also realise that the
concept of “age” isn’t actually all that precise. In general, when we
say “age” we implicitly mean “the length of time since birth”. But
that’s not always the right way to do it. Suppose you’re interested in
how newborn babies control their eye movements. If you’re interested in
kids that young, you might also start to worry that “birth” is not the
only meaningful point in time to care about. If Baby Alice is born 3
weeks premature and Baby Bianca is born 1 week late, would it really
make sense to say that they are the “same age” if we encountered them “2
hours after birth”? In one sense, yes. By social convention we use birth
as our reference point for talking about age in everyday life, since it
defines the amount of time the person has been operating as an
independent entity in the world. But from a scientific perspective
that’s not the only thing we care about. When we think about the biology
of human beings, it’s often useful to think of ourselves as organisms
that have been growing and maturing since conception, and from that
perspective Alice and Bianca aren’t the same age at all. So you might
want to define the concept of “age” in two different ways: the length of
time since conception and the length of time since birth. When dealing
with adults it won’t make much difference, but when dealing with
newborns it might.

Moving beyond these issues, there’s the question of methodology. What
specific “measurement method” are you going to use to find out someone’s
age? As before, there are lots of different possibilities:

-  You could just ask people “how old are you?” The method of
   self-report is fast, cheap and easy. But it only works with people
   old enough to understand the question, and some people lie about
   their age.

-  You could ask an authority (e.g., a parent) “how old is your child?”
   This method is fast, and when dealing with kids it’s not all that
   hard since the parent is almost always around. It doesn’t work as
   well if you want to know “age since conception”, since a lot of
   parents can’t say for sure when conception took place. For that, you
   might need a different authority (e.g., an obstetrician).

-  You could look up official records, for example birth or death
   certificates. This is a time consuming and frustrating endeavour, but
   it has its uses (e.g., if the person is now dead).

Operationalisation: defining your measurement
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

All of the ideas discussed in the previous section relate to the concept
of **operationalisation**. To be a bit more precise about the idea,
operationalisation is the process by which we take a meaningful but
somewhat vague concept and turn it into a precise measurement. The
process of operationalisation can involve several different things:

-  Being precise about what you are trying to measure. For instance,
   does “age” mean “time since birth” or “time since conception” in the
   context of your research?

-  Determining what method you will use to measure it. Will you use
   self-report to measure age, ask a parent, or look up an official
   record? If you’re using self-report, how will you phrase the
   question?

-  Defining the set of allowable values that the measurement can take.
   Note that these values don’t always have to be numerical, though they
   often are. When measuring age the values are numerical, but we still
   need to think carefully about what numbers are allowed. Do we want
   age in years, years and months, days, or hours? For other types of
   measurements (e.g., gender) the values aren’t numerical. But, just as
   before, we need to think about what values are allowed. If we’re
   asking people to self-report their gender, what options to we allow
   them to choose between? Is it enough to allow only “male” or
   “female”? Do you need an “other” option? Or should we not give people
   specific options and instead let them answer in their own words? And
   if you open up the set of possible values to include all verbal
   response, how will you interpret their answers?

Operationalisation is a tricky business, and there’s no “one, true way”
to do it. The way in which you choose to operationalise the informal
concept of “age” or “gender” into a formal measurement depends on what
you need to use the measurement for. Often you’ll find that the
community of scientists who work in your area have some fairly
well-established ideas for how to go about it. In other words,
operationalisation needs to be thought through on a case by case basis.
Nevertheless, while there a lot of issues that are specific to each
individual research project, there are some aspects to it that are
pretty general.

Before moving on I want to take a moment to clear up our terminology,
and in the process introduce one more term. Here are four different
things that are closely related to each other:

-  **A theoretical construct**. This is the thing that you’re trying to
   take a measurement of, like “age”, “gender” or an “opinion”. A
   theoretical construct can’t be directly observed, and often they’re
   actually a bit vague.

-  **A measure**. The measure refers to the method or the tool that you
   use to make your observations. A question in a survey, a behavioural
   observation or a brain scan could all count as a measure.

-  **An operationalisation**. The term “operationalisation” refers to
   the logical connection between the measure and the theoretical
   construct, or to the process by which we try to derive a measure from
   a theoretical construct.

-  **A variable**. Finally, a new term. A variable is what we end up
   with when we apply our measure to something in the world. That is,
   variables are the actual “data” that we end up with in our data sets.

In practice, even scientists tend to blur the distinction between these
things, but it’s very helpful to try to understand the differences.

------

.. [#]
   Well... now this is awkward, isn’t it? This section is one of the
   oldest parts of the book, and it’s outdated in a rather embarrassing
   way. I wrote this in 2010, at which point all of those facts *were*
   true. Revisiting this in 2018, well I’m not 33 any more, but that’s
   not surprising I suppose. I can’t imagine my chromosomes have
   changed, so I’m going to guess my karyotype was then and is now XY.
   The self-identified gender, on the other hand...ah. I suppose the
   fact that the title page now refers to me as Danielle rather than
   Daniel might possibly be a giveaway, but I don’t typically identify
   as “male” on a gender questionnaire these days, and I prefer
   *“she/her”* pronouns as a default (it’s a long story)! I did think a
   little about how I was going to handle this in the book, actually.
   The book has a somewhat distinct authorial voice to it, and I feel
   like it would be a rather different work if I went back and wrote
   everything as Danielle and updated all the pronouns in the work.
   Besides, it would be a lot of work, so I’ve left my name as “Dan”
   throughout the book, and in any case “Dan” is a perfectly good
   nickname for “Danielle”, don’t you think? In any case, it’s not a big
   deal. I only wanted to mention it to make life a little easier for
   readers who aren’t sure how to refer to me. I still don’t like
   anchovies though :-)
