.. sectionauthor:: `Danielle J. Navarro <https://djnavarro.net/>`_ and `David R. Foxcroft <https://www.davidfoxcroft.com/>`_

Summary
-------

Perhaps I’m a simple minded person, but I love pictures. Every time I
write a new scientific paper one of the first things I do is sit down
and think about what the pictures will be. In my head an article is
really just a sequence of pictures linked together by a story. All the
rest of it is just window dressing. What I’m really trying to say here
is that the human visual system is a very powerful data analysis tool.
Give it the right kind of information and it will supply a human reader
with a massive amount of knowledge very quickly. Not for nothing do we
have the saying “a picture is worth a thousand words”. With that in
mind, I think that this is one of the most important chapters in the
book. The topics covered were:

-  *Common plots*. Much of the chapter was focused on standard graphs
   that statisticians like to produce:
   `histograms <Ch05_Graphics_1.html#histograms>`__,
   `box plots <Ch05_Graphics_2.html#box-plots>`__ and
   `bar graphs <Ch05_Graphics_3.html#bar-graphs>`__.

-  *Saving image files*. Importantly, we also covered how to `export your
   pictures <Ch05_Graphics_3.html#saving-image-files-using-jamovi>`__

One final thing to point out. Whilst jamovi produces some really neat
default graphics, editing the plots is currently not possible. For more
advanced graphics and plotting capability the packages available in
R are much more powerful. One of the most popular graphics systems is
provided by the ``ggplot2`` package (see http://ggplot2.org/), which is
loosely based on “The grammar of graphics” (`Wilkinson, 2006
<References.html#wilkinson-2006>`__\ ). It’s not for novices. You need
to have a pretty good grasp of R before you can start using it, and even
then it takes a while to really get the hang of it. But when you’re
ready it’s worth taking the time to teach yourself, because it’s a much
more powerful and cleaner system.
