.. sectionauthor:: `Danielle J. Navarro <https://djnavarro.net/>`_ and `David R. Foxcroft <https://www.davidfoxcroft.com/>`_

How are probability and statistics different?
---------------------------------------------

Before we start talking about probability theory, it’s helpful to spend
a moment thinking about the relationship between probability and
statistics. The two disciplines are closely related but they’re not
identical. Probability theory is “the doctrine of chances”. It’s a
branch of mathematics that tells you how often different kinds of events
will happen. For example, all of these questions are things you can
answer using probability theory:

-  What are the chances of a fair coin coming up heads 10 times in a
   row?

-  If I roll a six sided dice twice, how likely is it that I’ll roll two
   sixes?

-  How likely is it that five cards drawn from a perfectly shuffled deck
   will all be hearts?

-  What are the chances that I’ll win the lottery?

Notice that all of these questions have something in common. In each
case the “truth of the world” is known and my question relates to the
“what kind of events” will happen. In the first question I *know* that
the coin is fair so there’s a 50% chance that any individual coin flip
will come up heads. In the second question I *know* that the chance of
rolling a 6 on a single die is 1 in 6. In the third question I *know*
that the deck is shuffled properly. And in the fourth question I *know*
that the lottery follows specific rules. You get the idea. The critical
point is that probabilistic questions start with a known **model** of
the world, and we use that model to do some calculations. The underlying
model can be quite simple. For instance, in the coin flipping example we
can write down the model like this:

*P*\ (heads) = *0.5*

which you can read as “the probability of heads is 0.5”. As we’ll see
later, in the same way that percentages are numbers that range from 0%
to 100%, probabilities are just numbers that range from 0 to 1. When
using this probability model to answer the first question I don’t
actually know exactly what’s going to happen. Maybe I’ll get 10 heads,
like the question says. But maybe I’ll get three heads. That’s the key
thing. In probability theory the *model* is known but the *data* are
not.

So that’s probability. What about statistics? Statistical questions work
the other way around. In statistics we do not know the truth about the
world. All we have is the data and it is from the data that we want to
*learn* the truth about the world. Statistical questions tend to look
more like these:

-  If my friend flips a coin 10 times and gets 10 heads are they playing
   a trick on me?

-  If five cards off the top of the deck are all hearts how likely is it
   that the deck was shuffled?

-  If the lottery commissioner’s spouse wins the lottery how likely is
   it that the lottery was rigged?

This time around the only thing we have are data. What I *know* is that
I saw my friend flip the coin 10 times and it came up heads every time.
And what I want to **infer** is whether or not I should conclude that
what I just saw was actually a fair coin being flipped 10 times in a
row, or whether I should suspect that my friend is playing a trick on
me. The data I have look like this:

.. code-block:: rout

   H H H H H H H H H H H

and what I’m trying to do is work out which “model of the world” I
should put my trust in. If the coin is fair then the model I should
adopt is one that says that the probability of heads is 0.5, that is
*P*\ (heads) = *0.5*. If the coin is not fair then I should
conclude that the probability of heads is *not* 0.5, which we would
write as *P*\ (heads) ≠ *0.5*. In other words, the statistical inference problem
is to figure out which of these
probability models is right. Clearly, the statistical question isn’t the
same as the probability question, but they’re deeply connected to one
another. Because of this, a good introduction to statistical theory will
start with a discussion of what probability is and how it works.
